R A SP

N
 

O

E P L U RIBUS UNUM 

NAL  T

 

O
I
T
A
N

R

T

A

T

I

O
N

National Transportation Safety Board 

Washington, D.C. 20594 

Pipeline Accident Brief 

 

 

 

S

AFETY

 

 B O A R D

 

Accident No.:  
Type of System: 
Accident Type: 
Location: 
Date: 
Time: 
Owner/Operator: 
Property Damage and Losses: 
Fatalities: 
Injuries:  
Material Released: 
Pipeline Pressure: 
Component Affected: 

DCA-08-FP-006 
Natural gas distribution 
Leak, explosion, and fire 
Plum Borough, Pennsylvania 
March 5, 2008 
1:39 p.m. eastern standard time1 
Dominion Peoples Natural Gas Company 
$1,000,000 
1 
1 
Natural gas 
10 pounds per square inch, gauge 
2-inch steel natural gas distribution pipeline 

The Accident 
 

On March 5, 2008, about 1:39 p.m., a natural gas explosion destroyed a residence 
at  171  Mardi  Gras  Drive  in  Plum  Borough,  Pennsylvania,  killing  a  man  and  seriously 
injuring  a  4-year-old  girl.  Two  other  houses  were  destroyed,  and  11  houses  were 
damaged. Property damage and losses were $1,000,000. 
Postaccident Investigation 

No report of a gas odor was filed with Dominion Peoples Natural Gas Company 
(Dominion) before the accident. Several neighbors and a postal worker who were on the 
property 30 minutes before the explosion stated during postaccident interviews that they 
had  not  smelled  gas  before  the  accident. The  Pennsylvania  Public  Utility  Commission 
(PUC) tested several homeowners to determine whether they could smell the odorant that 
indicates  the  presence  of  natural  gas;  each  was  able  to  smell  the  odorant  at  minimum 
levels.  

                                                 

1 All times in this brief are eastern standard time. 

NTSB/PAB-08/01 
 

Emergency Response 

At 1:40 p.m., the Holiday Park Fire Department was notified about an explosion 
involving  a  home  with  two  people  inside. (See  figure  1.)   About  1:45  p.m.,  the  police 
were on the scene. About 1:50 p.m., the fire chief arrived at the scene. About 1:59 p.m., 
an injured man was pulled from the debris. An injured girl, who had been blown free of 
the  debris  and  rescued  by  a  neighbor,  received  on-scene  medical  assistance. About  30 
minutes after the explosion, a helicopter evacuated the man and the girl. The man died en 
route to the hospital. The local fire department declared the fire to be under control at 
2:20 p.m.; at that time, the gas pipeline was feeding three small fires in the debris. The 
fire department remained at the scene until the fires were extinguished, at 6:59 p.m.  

           
Figure 1.  Damage to 171 Mardi Gras Drive. 

 

Dominion Peoples Natural Gas Company’s Actions 

Dominion  operated  two  gas  distribution  pipelines  in  the  neighborhood:  a  2-inch 
carbon steel main pipeline in front of the destroyed home and an 8-inch carbon steel main 
pipeline across the street from the destroyed home. (See figure 2.) The 2-inch pipeline 
provided  gas  to  the  homes  on  the  street;  the  8-inch  pipeline  passed  through  the 
neighborhood. 

At 1:44 p.m., Dominion was notified of the explosion by a neighbor who had called 
Dominion’s  emergency  dispatch  telephone  number. At  that  time,  Dominion  dispatched 
personnel to the scene. By 2:12 p.m., a Dominion customer serviceperson had arrived at 
the  scene.  At  2:17  p.m.,  the  maintenance  crews  arrived.  About  2:20  p.m.,  Dominion 
supervisors arrived.  
 

2

 

After  arriving,  Dominion  began  to  shut  down  both  pipelines.  According  to  a 
Dominion crewmember, the crew had to shut off four gas control valves to stop the flow 
of gas to the two pipelines. Two other crewmembers told a Safety Board investigator that 
although  they  were  able  to  close  the  shut-off  valves,  the  valves  were  “a  bit  snug.” 
Consequently, the 2-inch pipeline was not shut down until about 5:50 p.m., and the 8-inch 
pipeline was not shut down until 5:55 p.m. Dominion provided the following explanation 
for the 4 hours needed to close the four shut-off valves. The two pipelines were two-way 
feeds  in  which  pressurized  gas  flowed  from  either  direction;  thus,  shutting  them  down 
required closing four valves. Two of the four valves closed properly; however, two other 
valves did not close completely. A Dominion crew had to dig up and fix the faulty valves 
before they could completely shut off the gas flow. Since the fire department had the fire 
under  control  at  2:20  p.m.,  the  4  hours  needed  by  Dominion  to  close  the  four  control 
valves did not increase the severity of the accident.  

In  November  2008,  Dominion’s  manager  of  delivery  operations  confirmed  that 
Dominion  was  in  the  process  of  reclassifying  many  of  the  shut-off  valves  within  its 
system as critical valves. These critical valves are subject to more frequent inspections 
and  maintenance  checks  in  accordance  with  the  Federal  natural  gas  pipeline  safety 
regulations  in  49  Code  of  Federal  Regulations  Section  192.747.  According  to  these 
regulations, “each valve, the use of which may be necessary for the safe operation of a 
distribution system, must be checked and serviced, at intervals not exceeding 15 months, 
but  at  least  once  each  calendar  year.” The  regulations  also  require  an  operator  to  take 
prompt  remedial  action  to  correct  any  such  valve  found  to  be  inoperable  unless  the 
operator  designates  an  alternative  valve.  Non-critical  valves  are  to  be  checked  and 
serviced every 5 years. 

Figure 2. Diagram of accident. (North is to the right.)  

 
 

3

 

 

According to a Dominion crewmember interviewed by a Safety Board investigator, 
the Dominion crewmembers began bar-hole testing shortly after their arrival, at 2:17 p.m. 
Their initial bar-hole testing focused on the 8-inch pipeline because the 2-inch pipeline 
was a loop off the 8-inch pipeline. However, after the crewmembers noticed “bubbling” 
in the wet ground above the 2-inch pipeline and in a sewer line in front of the accident 
residence, they started excavating these areas.  

Under the supervision of the PUC, Dominion crews exposed the 2-inch pipeline at 
8:29 p.m. A circumferential crack ran about 270 degrees around the pipe; the top section 
of the pipe was not cracked. The pipe was bowed with a dented underside. The pipe was 
marked and photographed. (See figure 3.)  A 90-inch section of the pipe, which contained 
the circumferential crack and the dented area, was sent to the Safety Board’s Materials 
Laboratory for examination.  

 
Figure  3.  Cracked  pipeline.  (The  large  white  mark  indicates  the  top  of  the  pipeline 
when it was excavated.) 

 

During the next 2 days, bar-hole testing was conducted every 30 minutes on the 2-
inch pipeline, the 8-inch pipeline, and all service pipelines in the area. At 10:00 p.m. on 
March  6,  the  day  after  the  explosion,  the  gas  readings  were  recorded  as  high  as  18.8 
percent along the 8-inch pipeline. Two days after the accident, at noon, the readings had 
diminished  to  zero.  During  pressure  tests  of  the  repaired  2-inch  pipeline,  no  leakage 
occurred.  

Pipeline Information and Leak History 

The  2-inch  pipe  had  been  manufactured  in  accordance  with  American  Petroleum 
Institute  (API)  Specification  5L  Grade  B  standard  wall  thickness  (that  is,  0.154-inch 
nominal  wall  thickness).  Its  exterior  coating  had  been  wrapped  in  coal  tar  enamel, 
 

 

4

 

cathodically  protected,  and  monitored.  The  pipeline  had  been 
August 9, 1961, as a distribution main pipeline; it had a maximum allowable operating 
pressure of 30 pounds per square inch, gauge (psig) and was operated at about 10 psig. 

installed  on               

The odorant used for the natural gas was a 50-50 blend of tertiary-butyl mercaptan 
and tetrahydrothiophene. Dominion’s records indicate that the odorant was in the piping 
system, that the odorometer tests, which were conducted before and after the accident, 
met U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) and Pennsylvania State requirements, and 
that  the  odorant  level  was  within  prescribed  concentrations.  The  leak  history  was  also 
examined,  and  no  leaks  on  the  2-inch  pipeline  had  been  reported  since  its  installation. 
The cathodic protection pipe-to-soil potentials were all above the DOT requirement2 of 
0.85 volts.  

Safety Board’s Materials Laboratory Testing 

The Safety Board’s Materials Laboratory examined the section of 2-inch pipe that 
was removed from the accident site and noted that the pipe had several bends. The coal 
tar enamel coating was missing from a 3-foot section that included the pipeline’s cracked 
bottom. The bottom was also dented and deformed upward at the crack. 

 
General  corrosion  was  found  along  the  length  of  the  pipeline.  Intrusions  of 
intergranular corrosion were found adjacent to the crack. The loss of wall thickness was 
estimated to be about 0.010 inches at the crack. Mechanical test results were consistent 
for  a  pipe  that  was  manufactured  in  accordance  with  API  5L  Grade  B  specifications. 
Based on the crack in the 2-inch pipeline and the results of bar-hole tests and laboratory 
examination,  the  crack  was  the  most  likely  cause  of  the  release  of  natural  gas  and  the 
subsequent explosion. 

Prior Excavation Activity 

On October 15, 2003, about 5 years before the accident, the owners of 171 Mardi 
Gras Drive had hired a master plumber to replace the sewage line so that the house would 
comply with the county code. The plumber hired an excavator to uncover the sewer line. 
The Pennsylvania One-Call records verified that it had been notified of the excavation 
and that Dominion and the local water company had made the markouts.3  

During postaccident interviews with a Safety Board investigator, the plumber and 
excavator said that they had seen the markouts and that the markouts had been properly 
placed. The excavator said that he had used a backhoe to uncover the sewer line, that he 
had replaced the sewer’s original terra cotta line with a plastic line, that he had backfilled 
most of the excavation with porous sandstone, and that he had not dug near the pipeline. 
The plumber said that he had done the digging near the pipeline and that he had done it 
by hand. Both said that they had not damaged the pipeline during the excavation. 

                                                 

electrical potential that exceeds 0.85 volts.   

2 Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations 192.463 requires that a steel gas pipeline have a pipe-to-soil 

3  A  markout  is  a  ground  marking  that  is  typically  color  coded  and  that  indicates  the  location  of 

underground utilities. 
 

5

 

The sewer line that the plumber had installed was perpendicular to the pipeline and 
crossed below it on the north side of the driveway. The crack in the pipeline was 5 feet 
from  the  driveway;  the  sewer  line  was  3  feet,  8  inches,  from  the  driveway.  The  gas 
service pipeline was on the south side of the driveway. 

Failure of Pipeline 

 The pipeline failure was probably rapid since no one had smelled gas 30 minutes 
before the explosion. The porous backfill for the new sewer line could have provided an 
easy  pathway  for  the  gas  to  migrate  into  the  residence.  Additionally,  the  crack  on  the 
pipeline, at 10 psig, could have quickly allowed a flammable amount of gas to collect 
within the residence, which had many potential ignition sources. 

According  to  Pennsylvania  One-Call,  the  only  recorded  excavation  was  the 
plumber’s replacement of the sewer line in 2003. The dents and the deformation in the 
pipeline indicate that it had been struck from below by something more powerful than a 
hand  shovel.  The  extent  of  the  corrosion  observed  by  the  Safety  Board’s  Materials 
Laboratory is consistent with 5 years of in-ground exposure. Therefore, it is likely that 
the excavator struck the pipeline with the backhoe, thereby stripping the pipeline of its 
protective coating and making the pipeline susceptible to corrosion and failure. 

Probable Cause 
 
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of 
the  leak,  explosion,  and  fire  in  Plum  Borough,  Pennsylvania,  on  March  5,  2008,  was 
excavation damage to the 2-inch natural gas distribution pipeline that stripped the pipe’s 
protective coating and made the pipe susceptible to corrosion and failure. 

Adopted: November 21, 2008 

 

 

6

 

