R A SP

N
 

O

E P L U RIBUS UNUM 

NAL  T

 

O
I
T
A
N

R

T

A

T

I

O
N

 

 

 

S

AFETY

 

 B O A R D

Accident No.: 
Type of System: 
Accident Type: 
Location: 
Date: 
Time: 
Owner: 
Facility: 
Operator: 
Fatalities/Injuries: 
Damage/Clean-up Cost: 
Material Released: 
Quantity Released: 
Pipeline Pressure: 
Component Affected: 

 

The Accident 

National Transportation Safety Board 

Washington, D.C. 20594 

Pipeline Accident Brief 

 

DCA05-MP001 
Hazardous liquid 
Pipeline rupture and leak with vapor cloud 
6 miles west of Kingman, Kansas 
October 27, 2004 
11:15 a.m. central daylight time 
Magellan Midstream Partners, L.P. 
Magellan Ammonia Pipeline/Enid Lateral 
Enterprise Products Operating L.P. 
None 
$680,715 
Anhydrous ammonia 
4,858 barrels (204,000 gallons) 
981 psig 
Pipe 

About 11:15 a.m. central daylight time1 on October 27, 2004, an 8-inch-diameter pipeline 
owned by Magellan Midstream Partners, L.P., (Magellan) and operated by Enterprise Products 
Operating L.P. (Enterprise) ruptured near Kingman, Kansas, and released approximately 4,858 
barrels  (204,000  gallons)  of  anhydrous  ammonia.2  Nobody  was  killed  or  injured  due  to  the 
release. The anhydrous ammonia leaked into a creek and killed more than 25,000 fish including 
some from threatened species. The cost of the accident was $680,715, including $459,415 for 
environmental remediation. 
Accident Narrative  

On October 27, 2004, a pipeline controller in the Enterprise control center in Houston, 
Texas, was operating an 8-inch-diameter anhydrous ammonia pipeline owned by Magellan. The 
                                                 

1 All times in this brief are central daylight time. 
2  Anhydrous  ammonia  is  classified  in  49  Code  of  Federal  Regulations  (CFR)  Part  195  as  a  highly  volatile 
liquid.  Anhydrous  ammonia  is  transported  as  a  liquefied  gas  in  a  pipeline  and,  when  released,  will  immediately 
return to a gaseous state and rapidly expand. It is a hazardous liquid that is highly corrosive and toxic, and its vapors 
also  are  extremely  irritating  and  corrosive.  Anhydrous  ammonia  may  be  fatal  if  inhaled,  ingested,  or  absorbed 
through the skin. 

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

ammonia pipeline runs from Borger, Texas, to Mankato, Minnesota. The Enid Lateral segment of 
the ammonia pipeline originates at the Koch Enid production facility in Enid, Oklahoma, runs 
through Harper Station (Kansas), and ties in to the mainline at Partridge Station. (See figure 1.)  

 

Figure 1. Map of Magellan ammonia pipeline showing rupture location on 8-inch Enid Lateral. 

 
When the pipeline controller returned to his console after getting his lunch, he noticed 
two rate-of-change alarms3 that had been displayed on the alarm screen for the ammonia pipeline 
less  than  a  minute  earlier.  The  supervisory  control  and  data  acquisition  (SCADA)  event  log 
indicated  negative  rate-of-change  alarms  for  suction  pressure  at  both  Harper  Station  (at 
11:15:43 a.m.) and Conway Station (at 11:16:27 a.m.).  

About 11:18 a.m., an off-duty volunteer firefighter traveling on Highway 54 called 911 to 
report  a  huge  vapor  cloud  on  the  north  side  of  the  highway  that  he  believed  was  a  pipeline 
release.  (See  figure  2.) The  911  center  in  Kingman  County,  Kansas,  is  in  the  county  sheriff’s 
office. The Kingman County Fire Department was dispatched to the rupture site about 11:20 a.m. 
Because  the  rupture  site  was  in  an  agricultural  area  that  is  home  to  several  threatened  and 
endangered species of fish and wildlife, it was designated by Enterprise as a high-consequence 
area.4  The  vapor  cloud  moved  northwest  from  the  rupture  and  affected  vegetation  in  an  area 
                                                 

3 A rate-of-change alarm is displayed when a change in pressure or flow exceeds an identified value. 
4 A high-consequence area is defined in the Federal pipeline safety regulations as a commercially navigable 
waterway, high- or concentrated-population area, or unusually sensitive area that might be affected by an accident 

2

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

approximately  1/2  mile  wide  and  1  1/2  miles  long. The  release  entered  an  unnamed  tributary 
stream  that  was  approximately  36  feet  from  the  pipeline  failure.  The  tributary  stream  enters 
Smoots Creek approximately 1 1/2 miles downstream of the rupture. 

 

Figure 2. Ammonia vapor cloud moving northwest from pipeline rupture. 

Between 11:19:34 a.m. and 11:19:55 a.m., four more alarms from Conway Station were 
displayed at the controller’s console, including low suction pressure,5 low-low suction pressure,6 
an  uncommanded  pump  shutdown,  and  a  rate-of-change  alarm  that  was  followed  by  a  low 
suction pressure alarm from Partridge Station. Then two additional rate-of-change alarms were 
displayed, at 11:20:31 a.m. from Conway and at 11:21:26 a.m. from Partridge. In the 13 seconds 
between 11:27:33 a.m. and 11:27:46 a.m., five additional alarms were displayed, including low 
flow  and  the  uncommanded  shutdown  of  Abilene  Station.  At  11:27:50  a.m.,  the  controller 
increased the flow rate set point on the flow control valve at Enid Station from approximately 
450 barrels per hour to 550 barrels per hour. At 11:27:51 a.m., a second low-low suction pressure 
alarm from Conway Station was displayed.  

                                                                                                                                                             
involving the pipeline. Title 49 CFR 195.450 contains the criteria for designating an area a high-consequence area 
for hazardous liquid pipelines.  

5 A low suction pressure alarm for a pump at a pump station along a pipeline can be set at a value selected by 

the pipeline controller (higher than low-low) as a warning of an abnormal condition or a possible pipeline leak. 

6  A  low-low  suction  pressure  alarm  is  a  high  level  (red)  alarm  in  the  SCADA  system  that  is  considered  an 

immediate response alarm. 

3

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

The  controller  knew  that  Enterprise  maintenance  personnel  were  working  at  Conway 
Station. In a telephone call to Conway Station at 11:28 a.m., he asked why the pump had shut 
down. By 11:30 a.m., Conway Station personnel had told the controller that they had not caused 
the pump to shut down. At 11:34:05 a.m., the SCADA system displayed a low suction pressure 
rate-of-change alarm downstream at Linn Station followed by a low-low suction pressure alarm 
at 11:34:30 a.m.  

On  the  basis  of  the  911  call  at  11:18  a.m.,  the  Kingman  County  sheriff’s  office  had 
responded  to  the  site  and  started  telephoning  residents  in  35  houses;  four  families  were 
evacuated; no residents were home at 28 houses. By about 11:40 a.m., the sheriff’s office and the 
fire department had blocked roads that could be affected by the vapor cloud.  

About  11:48  a.m.,  the  dispatcher  called  Enterprise’s  control  room  to  report  the  release 
that had been reported to 911. Another controller, who was sitting at the console adjacent to the 
ammonia pipeline controller’s console, answered the phone and handled the call. The ammonia 
pipeline  controller  told  investigators  that  when  he  heard  the  telephone  ring  he  immediately 
realized that there was a leak on the ammonia pipeline. He started to shut down the pipeline at 
11:48:20 a.m.  by  remotely  stopping  the  pumps  at  Enid,  Verdigris,  Wellsford,  and  Borger 
Stations,7 in that order. The last one, Borger, was shut down at 11:52:57 a.m. From his console, 
he remotely closed the block valve at Harper Station, and at 11:54:24 a.m., he closed the block 
valve  at  Partridge  Station.  These  closures  isolated  a  50.85-mile-long  segment  of  pipeline  in 
which  the  rupture  had  occurred.  At  12:08  p.m.,  he  dispatched  Enterprise  personnel  to  close 
manual  block  valves  at  milepost  markers  21  and  32  to  further  isolate  the  leaking  pipeline 
segment.  At  12:56 p.m.  and  1:09  p.m.,  respectively,  those  valves  were  closed.  These  valve 
closures reduced the isolated segment of pipeline in which the rupture had occurred to 11 miles.  
Controller’s Actions  

The controller told investigators after the rupture that he had been viewing the tabular 
screen  and  knew  the  alarms  indicated  a  potential  problem  with  the  pipeline.  To  evaluate  the 
alarms  from  the  pipeline,  he  used  the  tabular  data  screen  in  the  SCADA  system.  This  screen 
listed the pipeline facilities and displayed current data for the entire pipeline system, including 
pump station suction and discharge pressures, pump status, tank levels, flow rates, valve status, 
and  set  points.  Alarm  information  that  was  displayed  on  the  alarm  screen  also  flashed  and 
changed color on the tabular screen. The controller’s assessment was that he was delivering more 
ammonia  from  the  pipeline  than  was  being  added  to  the  pipeline  and  that  this  condition  had 
decreased the pressure. This assessment led him to increase the flow rate at 11:27:50. He later 
said  that  he  thought  that  within  10  or  15  minutes  the  pressure  readings  would  increase. 
Therefore, he planned to wait for a few minutes, and, if the pressure readings for the pipeline did 
not increase, he would reevaluate and delve deeper into the situation.  

The SCADA system can display a trend screen that shows pressure and flow trend data 
graphically, and the controller told investigators that looking at a trend screen would have been 
helpful in the analytical stage. However, he did not use trend screens in evaluating the incoming 

                                                 

7 The controller stopped pumps at these stations because at the time he did not know whether the leak was on 

the mainline from Borger, on the Enid Lateral, or on the mainline downstream of Partridge Station.  

4

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

data. He said that his training did not specify which screens to use to analyze and evaluate the 
SCADA data. He stated that from 11:15 a.m. to 11:48 a.m. an unusually high number of alarms 
and  status  events  were  displayed  for  the  pipeline.8  During  this  33-minute  period,  the  SCADA 
system displayed 119 alarms and status events. The controller said that he felt that he had full 
authority to shut down the pipeline and that he did not believe there would be consequences from 
Enterprise if he shut down a pipeline and it was subsequently determined that there was no leak.  

The  operations  control  supervisor  stated  in  an  interview  that  he  expects  pipeline 
controllers to use the tabular screen as the main screen, or “front page.” He said that controllers 
are taught to access and display a trend screen, or “second page,” to further investigate an alarm 
and  the  condition  that  caused  it.  The  supervisor  said  that  pressure  and  flow  changes  are  the 
primary parameters used to detect leaks. He stated that at the time of the accident, rate-of-change 
alarms  were  displayed  in  blue  and  immediate  response  alarms  were  displayed  in  red.  He 
indicated  that  he  believes  the  controller  had  enough  information  between  11:20  a.m.  and 
11:25 a.m. to lead him to shut down the ammonia pipeline.  
Telephonic Reporting of Release 

The  Federal  pipeline  safety  regulation  for  telephonic  reporting  of  hazardous  liquid 
pipeline  accidents  (49  CFR  195.52)  requires  telephonic  notification  to  the  National  Response 
Center  when  the  pipeline  accident  has  caused  a  death  or  injury  requiring  hospitalization;  has 
resulted  in  either  an  unintentional  fire  or  explosion;  has  caused  estimated  property  damage 
(including cleanup and recovery costs and the value of the lost product) exceeding $50,000; has 
resulted  in  pollution  of  streams,  rivers,  reservoirs,  or  other  similar  bodies  of  water;  or,  in  the 
judgment  of  the  operator,  is  significant  even  though  the  accident  does  not  meet  the  other 
specified  criteria.  The  regulation  further  requires  an  operator  to  include  in  the  telephonic 
notification not only the basic details, such as the identity of the operator, the location and time 
of  the  accident,  and  the  number  of  fatalities  and  injuries,  but  also  “all  other  significant  facts 
known by the operator that are relevant to the cause of the failure or extent of the damages.” 

On  August  30,  2002,  the  Pipeline  and  Hazardous  Materials  Safety  Administration 
(PHMSA)9 published a Federal Register notice issuing a safety advisory bulletin10 to operators 
of  gas  and  hazardous  liquid  pipelines  and  liquefied  natural  gas  facilities  about  telephonic 
reporting.  In  the  notice,  PHMSA  stated  that  it  is  critical  for  an  operator  to  provide  accurate 
information  on  the  extent  of  the  incident  and  that  PHMSA  expects  an  operator  to  provide 
significant updated information during the emergency response phase. The bulletin stated that if 
                                                 

8 The pipeline systems that this controller operated experienced an increase from an average of 137 alarms in an 

hour to 286 alarms between 11:00 a.m. and noon. 

9  In  a U.S.  Department  of  Transportation reorganization,  the  Research  and Special  Programs  Administration 
(RSPA) ceased operations on February 20, 2005. RSPA’s Office of Pipeline Safety programs  moved to the new 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. All references to predecessor agencies are designated as 
PHMSA in this report. 

10 The August 30, 2002, advisory bulletin was issued in response to the Safety Board’s Safety Recommendation 
P-02-02 (See Rupture of Piney Point Oil Pipeline and Release of Fuel Oil Near Chalk Point, Maryland, April 7, 
2000,  Pipeline  Accident  Report,  NTSB/PAR-02/01  [Washington,  DC:  NTSB,  2002.]).  The  Safety  Board 
issued Safety Recommendation P-02-02 to PHMSA to require pipeline owners and operators to provide follow-up 
telephone updates to the National Response Center when they discover that the information they initially reported 
contains significant errors or when they identify significant new information directly related to the reporting criteria. 

5

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

additional information leads to a significant change in the estimated quantity of product released, 
the estimated number of fatalities and injuries, the extent of environmental damage, or the extent 
of  property  damage,  the  operator  should  make  an  additional  telephonic  report  to  the  National 
Response Center. PHMSA considered “significant change” to include an increase or decrease of 
previously reported fatalities or injuries and a revised estimate of product released or property 
damage that is at least 10 times greater than the previous estimates. Regarding release estimates, 
the bulletin also stated that if the operator does not provide an estimate, the National Response 
Center  will  record  a  default  estimate  of  1,000  barrels  (42,000  gallons).  In  February  2005, 
PHMSA informed the Safety Board that rather than the National Response Center entering the 
1,000-barrel  default  estimate,  PHMSA  will  consider  telephonic  reports  made  without  a  spill 
estimate to have the same priority as reports with spill estimates of 1,000 barrels. The National 
Response Center confirmed in March 2005 that it will not enter the 1,000-barrel default value if 
the operator does not provide a spill estimate.  

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) requires that an anhydrous ammonia 
release equal to or greater than 100 pounds of ammonia (equivalent to approximately 20 gallons) 
be reported within 15 minutes of discovery. 

About  12:15  p.m.  on  October  27,  the  controller  notified  Enterprise’s  central  region 
operations manager of the release. Because field personnel were too busy to make the call, the 
manager  called  the  controller  back  to  tell  him  to  report  the  accident  to  Enterprise’s  accident 
reporting  contractor.11  In  the  controller’s  phone  conversation  with  the  accident  reporting 
contractor at 12:23 p.m., the controller reported that a large quantity of anhydrous ammonia had 
been released and had formed an ammonia vapor cloud, but he stated that he did not know the 
amount  of  anhydrous  ammonia  that  had  been  released.  When  the  contractor  responded  that 
without an estimate of a specific quantity the National Response Center would enter a 1,000-
barrel estimate in its incident report, the controller told the contractor that a 1,000-barrel estimate 
would be fine. The contractor asked whether the amount released was at least 20 gallons.12 The 
controller  confirmed  that  it  was.  Later,  when  the  contractor  asked  for  a  damage  estimate,  the 
controller  said  that  he  had  no  idea.  When  the  contractor  asked  him  to  choose  one  of  several 
ranges of dollar values from less than $5,000 to exceeding $50,000 as an estimate of the damage 
caused by the release, the controller chose the less-than-$5,000 range.  

At  1:08  p.m.,  Enterprise’s  reporting  contractor  reported  the  release  to  the  National 
Response Center. The National Response Center report of the incident stated that the release was 
a vapor cloud over the pipeline due to unknown causes. The contractor reported the estimated 
quantity of the release as 20 gallons and told the National Response Center that Enterprise would 
calculate the amount released when it got a chance. An updated release amount was not reported 
to the National Response Center. 

A PHMSA inspector arrived on site at 7:00 a.m. the next morning, October 28. About 
8:00  a.m.,  the  inspector  learned  from  Enterprise  operations  employees  that  at  that  time,  the 

                                                 

11 3E Company was Enterprise’s accident reporting contractor. 
12 When reporting an anhydrous ammonia release of unknown volume, Enterprise reported small releases as at 

least 20 gallons to indicate that a reportable quantity had been released.  

6

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

estimated amount of anhydrous ammonia released was at least 3,000 barrels (126,000 gallons).13 
This estimate of the release volume was based on an approximation of the amount of product 
normally contained in the pipeline between the two valves that had been manually closed. The 
final  estimate  of  the  release  volume  was  later  calculated  by  Enterprise  to  be  4,858  barrels 
(204,000 gallons). 

The EPA had received the initial report of a 20-gallon release from the National Response 
Center  on  October  27  about  2:42  p.m.  EPA  representatives  indicated  that  the  EPA  had  not 
responded  to  the  accident  site  because  the  reported  release  volume  was  so  small.  The  next 
morning, during a review of the previous day’s National Response Center reports, the EPA duty 
officer noticed that a vapor cloud had been reported, and he called Enterprise at 9:30 a.m. to ask 
why a vapor cloud was associated with a 20-gallon release. The Enterprise representative told the 
duty officer that the amount of ammonia released was much greater than the reported quantity, 
and he estimated the release to be at least 2,000 barrels (84,000 gallons). Following the phone 
call, two EPA on-scene coordinators were dispatched to the site to investigate. 

The EPA on-scene coordinators arrived at the site at 5:00 p.m. and discussed with Apex 
Environmental,  Inc.  (Apex),  Magellan’s  environmental  contractor,  the  need  for  sparging14  at 
Smoots Creek to lower the pH levels in the creek. Apex began sparging about 9:00 p.m. Sparging 
continued for several weeks following the rupture. Later, the Kansas Department of Health and 
Environment authorized the spreading of 3,500 cubic yards of nitrogen-rich soil, which had been 
excavated from the rupture location, over a cultivated area to fertilize the ground.  
Pipe Specification and Operating Conditions 

The  8.625-inch  nominal  outside  diameter  carbon  steel  pipe  at  the  rupture  location  was 
specified  as American  Petroleum  Institute  Specification  5LX,  grade  X46,  0.156-inch  nominal 
wall thickness with an electric resistance welded seam. After Mid-America Pipeline Company 
completed construction, the pipeline segment at the rupture location was hydrotested to 1,580 
pounds per square inch gauge (psig) on December 11, 1973. At the rupture location, the pipeline 
had a maximum operating pressure of 1,198 psig. The calculated pipeline operating pressure at 
the rupture site at the time of the release was 981 psig, and records of the operating conditions 
immediately before the accident do not indicate that the maximum operating pressure had been 
exceeded. The exterior surface of the pipe was coated with tar tape primer and spirally wrapped 
with a continuous overlap of tar tape. At the location of the rupture, the pipe was 4 feet 5 inches 
underground and was cathodically protected to control external corrosion.  
Materials Laboratory Examination and Tests 

The pipe segment that ruptured was removed and sent to the Safety Board’s Materials 
Laboratory  for  examination  and  testing.  The  segment  had  four  external  gouges.  The 

                                                 

13 The 3,000-barrel estimate was a rough field estimate. With the postaccident implementation of new reporting 
procedures, Enterprise would have been able to provide a more refined estimate of 3,600 barrels. See “Enterprise’s 
Postaccident Actions – Telephonic Report Procedure” in this report. 

14  Sparging  is  the  process  of  injecting  compressed  air  into  a  waterway  causing  volatile  pollutants  such  as 

ammonia to vaporize into the air. 

7

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

approximately 11.7-inch-long rupture occurred at one of the gouges. (See figure 3.) Over most of 
the rupture length, the gouge penetrated 0.019 inch (approximately 12.2 percent of the pipe wall 
thickness) into the pipe wall. Within the gouge, shear cracks penetrated the metal. From the base 
of the shear crack that led to the rupture, a fatigue crack propagated toward the interior of the 
pipe.  The  fatigue  crack  extended  approximately  0.080  inch  below  the  shear  crack  with  no 
external corrosion that resulted in a loss of material thickness. A detailed examination showed 
that the fatigue region had five bands, each with a different shade of gray, consistent with crack 
arrest marks. The area below the fatigue crack had a shear lip created during the sudden and final 
rupture of the pipe.  

 
Figure 3. Ruptured 8-inch Enid Lateral anhydrous ammonia pipeline showing four gouges 

and rupture. 

The results of chemical analysis, dimensional measurements, and tensile strength testing 
were in accordance with the American Petroleum Institute specification for 5LX-X46 pipe. An 
examination of a cross section of the gouge at the fracture origin area showed that metal of a 
different composition had transferred to the wall of the pipe. Elemental analysis of a metal tooth 
from the backhoe bucket owned by the property owner did not provide a unique signature when 
compared to the transferred metal in the gouges. The examination of the cross section revealed 
no  manufacturing  defects  (such  as  laminations,  voids,  or  porosity)  in  the  pipe  material.  The 
examination  of  the  inside  surface  of  the  pipe  showed  no  corrosion  degradation  or  additional 
cracking.  

8

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

Construction and Excavation Activity 

To  identify  any  construction  and  excavation  activities  in  the  area  of  the  rupture, 
investigators  examined  all  available  maintenance  records,  aerial  patrol  records,  and  aerial 
photographs that covered the period from construction of the pipeline in 1973 to the present, but 
identified  no  excavation  activities  immediately  over  the  rupture  site.  The  1973  construction 
specifications for the pipeline required that any coating damage be repaired before backfilling 
the pipeline. The trench for the pipeline was excavated with a trenching machine, and backfilling 
was  done  with  an  auger-type  backfill  machine  or  a  bulldozer.  According  to  the  construction 
specifications,  where  these  machines  could  not  be  used  to  backfill,  the  site  inspector  would 
approve  the  method  of  backfilling  before  it  began.  The  pipeline  tie-in  inspector  for  the  Enid 
Lateral construction did not recall what occurred at the accident location, and no construction 
inspection records exist. He indicated that a backhoe was not likely to be used in the pipe rupture 
area  during  construction  because  the  unnamed  stream  was  not  a  major  stream  crossing  that 
required the use of a backhoe.  

According to the current owner (since 1989), the area where the pipe ruptured had not 
been cultivated. Between 1990 and 1992, he had used his backhoe to grade the unnamed stream’s 
banks to create a vehicle ramp that was approximately 100 feet north of the pipe rupture. He told 
investigators that no excavation had been performed at the location of the rupture.  

The four gouges located longitudinally along the top half of the pipeline are consistent in 
shape and location with the type of mechanical damage caused by excavation equipment such as 
a backhoe. Since a unique metallurgical signature was not found in the analysis of metal deposits 
within  the  gouges,  the  Safety  Board  could  not  determine  whether  the  landowner’s  backhoe 
bucket was the source of the deposits. The pipeline tie-in inspector stated that on this pipeline 
construction project a backhoe typically would not have been used for crossing a stream of this 
size. However, the Safety Board could not rule out damage to the pipeline during construction. 
Available information and records covering the time from when the pipeline was constructed in 
1973  to  the  present  did  not  indicate  any  excavation  activity  by  the  pipeline  operator  near  the 
location of the rupture. However, the possibility of unknown excavation activities could not be 
eliminated.  The  Safety  Board  concludes  that  heavy  equipment  damage  to  the  pipeline  during 
construction or subsequent excavation activity created a pipe gouge that initiated metal fatigue 
cracking and led to the eventual rupture of the pipeline.  
Enterprise’s Policies and Procedures 
Procedures for Abnormal Operating Conditions  

Enterprise’s procedure manual defined an abnormal operating condition as “any condition 
that may cause, create, or contribute to a situation which exceeds the design or normal operating 
parameters of the pipeline.” The manual instructed controllers to treat an unexplained variation 
in pressure or flow as an abnormal operating condition. It also instructed controllers to continue 
to  monitor  pipeline  operations  and  follow  specific  steps  that  include  checking  “with  others 
involved  with  the  operations  to  determine  the  cause  of  the  variation”  and  to  be  “especially 
attentive for any sign that an emergency condition may follow.”  

9

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

To investigate a variation in pressure or flow, control room personnel were to notify on-
call  field  personnel  or  supervisors;  review  flow  data;  check  instantaneous  line  balance  by 
comparing  simultaneous  meter  readings  at  point  of  origin,  destination,  and  intermediate 
locations; and contact customers for possible explanation of the pressure or flow variation. If a 
logical  reason  for  a  variation  could  not  be  determined,  the  control  room  operator  was  to  shut 
down the pipeline and monitor pressure.  

Enterprise’s  draft  Natural  Gas  Liquids  Pipeline  Control  Operations  and  Maintenance 
Training Manual15 also contained information regarding the monitoring and control of anhydrous 
ammonia pipelines. The manual noted that rate-of-change alarms usually occur at the onset of an 
abnormal  condition  or  a  pipeline  leak.  Controllers  were  instructed  to  investigate  all  rate-of-
change and parameter alarms immediately, and they were advised that if an alarm resulted from a 
known cause, the pipeline system in the area of the alarm would stabilize in a short period of 
time. If the cause of a rate-of-change or parameter alarm was not readily apparent and the alarm 
was accompanied by one or more indications of a product release, or the pressure or flow failed 
to stabilize, controllers were instructed to shut down and block in the line segment. If a sudden 
unexplained  decrease  in  operating  pressure  without  a  corresponding  increase  in  flow  rate  was 
observed, the controller was instructed to shut down and block in the line segment for 30 minutes 
and then observe the line segment for any sign of a leak. 

Controllers were instructed during training to use trend screens to monitor the pipeline 
pressure  and,  if  the  pressure  continued  to  fall  or  did  not  stabilize,  to  perform  an  emergency 
shutdown. This procedure was included in the training manual. The alarm response matrix in the 
training manual described the SCADA alarm color scheme and listed a rate-of-change alarm as a 
high-level  alarm.  The  matrix  also  indicated  that  rate-of-change  alarms  for  pressure  and  flow 
(high-level, immediate attention) were shown in red on the SCADA screen and that these alarms 
indicated a possible line break.  

Enterprise  defined  an  emergency  as  a  “significant  change  from  steady  state  operating 
conditions”  that  could  include  an  “accidental  release  of  hazardous  vapors  or  liquids  from  a 
pipeline  causing  a  hazardous  situation.”  When  a  controller  determined  that  an  emergency 
existed, the manual required him to shut down pumps that feed the affected facility and close the 
nearest upstream remotely operated block valve. Pump stations downstream of the facility were 
to remain operating until they shut down on low flow, and then the nearest remotely operated 
downstream block valve was to be closed. The controller also was to notify identified personnel 
within the company as well as customers and emergency response agencies. 
Controller’s SCADA Training and Qualification 

The controller who operated the pipeline during the accident started at Enterprise as an 
area operator and was promoted to operations supervisor in the field in 1996. He took controller 
training, consisting of classroom study of company procedures and manuals, operations, SCADA 
information retrieval, and site-specific information. He functioned as a pipeline scheduler from 
1997 until 2003. In February 2003, he began on-the-job controller training. Enterprise assessed 
the effectiveness of his training by testing his knowledge and observing his actions in operating 

                                                 

15 Enterprise used the draft manual for training controllers. 

10

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

pipelines. He completed refresher training on May 21, 2003. His training included the study of 
procedural and training manuals for the ammonia pipeline. The study material explained how to 
respond to abnormal conditions and use trend screens with graphical displays. He successfully 
completed written examinations covering this material on September 13, 2003, and was qualified 
by Enterprise to operate the pipeline. Enterprise did not have a pipeline simulator for controller 
training but did use noncomputerized simulations in postaccident controller training sessions in 
2001.  The  review  of  noncomputerized  simulations  of  accidents  is  not  a  requirement  listed  in 
Enterprise’s training program. 
Telephonic Report Policy 

Enterprise’s  Procedural  Manual  for  Operations,  Maintenance,  and  Emergencies  stated 
that operations personnel are accountable for telephoning a report of an accident to the National 
Response  Center.  The  procedure  repeats  the  requirements  for  telephonic  reporting  in 
49 CFR 195.52.  

Enterprise’s  draft  Natural  Gas  Liquids  Pipeline  Control  Operations  and  Maintenance 
Training  Manual  stated  that  its  reporting  contractor  would  do  all  reporting  of  releases  and 
accidents to Federal, State, and local authorities for Magellan’s ammonia pipeline, and that the 
Enterprise field supervisor was responsible for reporting releases and accidents to the contractor. 
Enterprise  did  not  have  a  policy  about  who  was  responsible  for  deciding  whether  to  send  an 
additional report to the National Response Center in order to comply with the August 30, 2002, 
PHMSA  advisory  bulletin  urging  operators  to  update  a  telephonic  report  with  significant  new 
information, including a change in the estimate of the release volume. 

Before  the  accident,  Enterprise’s  central  region  operations  manager  had  supplemental 
reporting guidelines drafted for training field personnel. The operations manager’s objective was 
to  improve  timely  reporting  of  accidents  in  his  region  using  the  reporting  contractor.  The 
guidelines identified reporting responsibilities and included a list of questions that the contractor 
would  ask.  However,  the  guidelines  did  not  address  how  to  estimate  the  quantity  of  product 
released  or  how  to  make  a  dollar  estimate  of  damages.  The  draft  guidelines  were  used  in  a 
training  session  conducted  during  a  quarterly  safety  meeting 
the  quarter  ending 
March 31, 2003.  The  draft  guidelines,  Release  Reporting  Roles  and  Responsibilities,  dated 
June 3, 2003, was the last update of the draft.  
Integrity Management Program for Ammonia Pipeline  

in 

Williams Companies, Inc. (Williams), the previous owner and operator of the pipeline, 
prepared the initial integrity management program for the ammonia pipeline. It used a relative 
risk  assessment  model  that  considered  the  following  factors:  third-party  damage,  corrosion, 
incorrect operation, design, and leak impact. It ranked various pipeline segments according to 
their risk with respect to each other. Using this model, a lower score indicated higher risk, and a 
higher  score  indicated  lower  risk.  The  risk  scores  were  used  with  other  input  to  prioritize 
scheduling of baseline assessments of pipeline segments. Pipe segments with risk scores of 0 to 
35, 36 to 66, and 67 and above were considered high, medium, and low risk, respectively. When 
the baseline assessment plan was developed, the model assigned a risk score of 69 (low risk) to 

11

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

the segment on the Enid Lateral that ruptured in this accident. This Enid Lateral segment was 
scheduled for a baseline assessment in 2006.   

In  February  2003,  Enterprise  became  the  operator  for  the  pipeline  under  contract  to  a 
subsidiary of Williams. Enterprise has been responsible for the integrity management program 
for  the  pipeline  since  that  time.  Williams  subsequently  sold  the  pipeline  to  Magellan,  and 
Enterprise  continued  as  the  operator. The  original  integrity  management  program  remained  in 
effect until 2004 when Enterprise finished developing its own integrity management program, 
which was the program in effect at the time of the accident. The risk model in the Enterprise 
program was the same as the one used by Williams, and the risk score for the pipeline segment 
that contained the rupture had not been revised.  

PHMSA’s integrity management regulations list risk factors that must be considered in 
prioritizing  the  scheduling  of  baseline  assessments.  A  pipeline  segment’s  leak  history  is 
specifically included in the list of risk factors. Although Enterprise had leak history data for the 
accident pipeline segment, Enterprise did not have complete instructions for calculating the leak 
history risk factor in its integrity management program. As a result, leak history was not used in 
calculating the relative risk scores, nor was it otherwise considered to classify pipe segments as 
high, medium, or low risk for the baseline assessment before the Kingman accident. 
Federal Integrity Management Inspections 

In September and October 2003, PHMSA inspected the Enterprise integrity management 
program for the anhydrous ammonia pipeline, including the Enid Lateral pipeline segment. The 
inspection  revealed  some  deficiencies  that  were  noted  on  PHMSA’s  Integrity  Management 
Inspection Form and Inspection Summary Report. PHMSA identified several compliance issues 
and issued a Notice of Amendment to Enterprise on April 22, 2004, to correct deficiencies in its 
integrity management program. One of the compliance issues pertained to risk factors used in 
prioritizing  the  baseline  assessment  schedule.  PHMSA  noted  that  the  following  risk  factors 
required  by  regulation  were  not  addressed  by  Enterprise:  seam  type,  results  of  previous 
assessments, defect type and size that the assessment method can detect, and defect growth rate. 
PHMSA  also  asked  that  more  detail  be  included  in  documentation  describing  how  these  risk 
factors  will  be  integrated  into  the  decision-making  process  for  prioritizing  the  baseline 
assessment schedule. However, PHMSA did not identify that pipeline leak history also was not 
used in Enterprise’s calculation of relative risk scores. 

In letters dated May 21 and July 28, 2004, Enterprise responded to the PHMSA Notice of 
Amendment with revised procedures to integrate the risk factors that had been identified in the 
notice as deficient. However, Enterprise did not update its baseline assessment for prioritizing 
the scheduling of pipeline segments using the revised procedures. Enterprise also did not modify 
or update the procedures for leak history in its revised procedures. After reviewing Enterprise’s 
May 21 and July 8 responses, PHMSA closed the Notice of Amendment on October 18, 2004. 
PHMSA did not require Enterprise to update the baseline assessment using the revised risk factor 
procedures.  

12

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

Enterprise’s Postaccident Actions  
SCADA Alarms Review 

After the accident, Enterprise established a program to review the rate-of-change alarms 
systemwide because the company believed that the alarms were not as effective as they should 
be. The goal of the review was to make the alarms more meaningful by significantly reducing the 
number of alarms that could distract controllers from  more  critical  alarms. Before the review, 
controllers received about 10,000 SCADA alarms/events systemwide on an average day. After 
the review, the average number of alarms per day dropped below 4,000. After determining that 
controllers  would  not  be  overwhelmed  by  reclassifying  rate-of-change  alarms  to  a  higher 
priority, Enterprise changed the alarm from medium level (blue) to high level (red) to emphasize 
the need for immediate attention to those alarms. 
Controller Training  

Enterprise supervisors reviewed the circumstances of the accident with the controller and 
identified deficiencies in his response. No disciplinary actions were taken against the controller. 
Enterprise conducted two training sessions for its entire staff of anhydrous ammonia and natural 
gas  liquid  pipeline  controllers.  In  the  training  sessions,  Enterprise  used  a  noncomputerized 
simulation to analyze the ammonia pipeline accident. During this simulation, as each alarm came 
in,  the  associated  trend  screen  was  displayed.  The  SCADA  tools  available  for  analyzing 
incoming alarm data, including trend screens, were reviewed. Controllers were told that if they 
saw an abnormal condition that indicated a possible leak and they were unable to analyze the 
condition and determine the cause of the problem within approximately 5 minutes, the controller 
was  to  shut  down  and  block  in  the  pipeline.  Enterprise  has  not  made  noncomputerized 
simulations a part of its recurrent training program. 
Telephonic Report Procedure 

Enterprise developed a new telephonic reporting procedure, dated January 20, 2006, for 
estimating  the  amount  of  product  released  and  related  damages  based  on  pipeline  physical 
characteristics and available operating data. When sufficient operating data are not available for 
anhydrous ammonia pipelines, the initial release amount to be reported will be the quantity of 
product  contained  between  the  valves  closed  on  either  side  of  the  leak.  The  procedure  also 
addresses a potential delay in telephonic reporting for releases that exceed the EPA reportable 
quantity. Specifically, to expedite the reporting to the National Response Center, Enterprise now 
requires the employee who reports the release to the reporting contractor to stay on the phone 
with the reporting contractor while the report is made. Enterprise also has designated company 
employees who will supply telephonic updates, as necessary, to the National Response Center. 
Integrity Management Program 

Since  the  accident,  Enterprise  has  revised  its  risk  assessment  model  to  incorporate  a 
pipeline  leak  history  factor  in  its  risk  assessment  calculation.  It  also  has  revised  its  baseline 
assessment of pipeline segments using all risk factors to schedule baseline assessments. 

13

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

Probable Cause 

The  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  determines  that  the  probable  cause  of  the 
pipeline rupture near Kingman, Kansas, on October 27, 2004, was a pipe gouge created by heavy 
equipment damage to the pipeline during construction in 1973 or subsequent excavation activity 
at an unknown time that initiated metal fatigue cracking and led to the eventual rupture of the 
pipeline.  Contributing  to  the  severity  of  the  accident  was  the  pipeline  controller’s  failure  to 
accurately evaluate available operating data and initiate a timely shutdown of the pipeline.  
Recommendations  

As  a  result  of  its  investigation  of  the  October  27,  2004,  anhydrous  ammonia  pipeline 
accident,  the  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  makes  the  safety  recommendations  listed 
below.  For  more  information  about  these  recommendations,  see  the  safety  recommendation 
letters16 to the recipients. 

To the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration:  

Require in 49 Code of Federal Regulations 195.52 that a pipeline operator must 
have a procedure to calculate and provide a reasonable initial estimate of released 
product in the telephonic report to the National Response Center. (P-07-7) 

Require in 49 Code of Federal Regulations 195.52 that a  pipeline operator must 
provide  an  additional  telephonic  report  to  the  National  Response  Center  if 
significant  new  information  becomes  available  during  the  emergency  response. 
(P-07-8)  

Require  an  operator  to  revise  its  pipeline  risk  assessment  plan  whenever  it  has 
failed to consider one or more risk factors that can affect pipeline integrity.  
(P-07-9) 

To Enterprise Products Operating L.P.:  

Provide initial and recurrent training for all controllers that includes simulator or 
noncomputerized  simulations  of  abnormal  operating  conditions  that  indicate 
pipeline leaks. (P-07-10) 

                                                 

16 These letters are available on the National Transportation Safety Board’s web site. 

14

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

 

BY THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD 

MARK V. ROSENKER 
Chairman 

DEBORAH A. P. HERSMAN 
Member 

STEVEN R. CHEALANDER 
Member 
 
Adopted: June 14, 2007 
 
 

ROBERT L. SUMWALT 
Vice Chairman  

KATHRYN O’LEARY HIGGINS 
Member 
 

 

15

NTSB/PAB-07/02 

