National Transportation Safety Board

Washington, D.C. 20594

Pipeline Accident Brief

DCA99-MP005
Colonial Pipeline Company
Hazardous liquid petroleum products pipeline
Pipe rupture
Knoxville, Tennessee
Diesel fuel, high sulfur, 86 Grade
11:58 p.m. EST 
February 9, 1999
None
$7 million 
About 53,550 gallons (1,275 barrels)
Approximately 91 psig
10-inch-diameter, Grade 5L X-42, 0.250-inch wall 
thickness, electric resistance weld steel pipe

R A SP

N
 

O

L U RIBUS UNUM 

E P

 

 

A L   T
N
O
I
T
A
N

 

S

R

T

A

T

I

O
N

 

R D

A

F

ETY

 B O A

Accident Number:
Owner/Operator:
Type of System:
Accident Type:
Location:
Product Released:
Time:
Date:
Fatalities/Injuries:
Property Damage:
Quantity Released:
Pipeline Pressure:
Component Affected:

The Accident

On  the  afternoon  of  February  9,  1999,  Colonial  Pipeline  Company  (Colonial)
successfully  completed  a  delivery  of  diesel  fuel  to  the  East  Knoxville  delivery  facility
(East Knoxville) in Knoxville, Tennessee, using its Atlanta Junction/Knoxville stubline.1
To  initiate  the  delivery,  an  operator  at  Colonial’s  Knoxville  Terminal  began  operating
valves  that  directed  product  into  a  10-inch-diameter  steel  pipeline  leading  to  the  East
Knoxville facility, about 8 miles away. At about the same time, a valve was opened at the
other end of that line to allow the product to flow into the East Knoxville facility tanks. At
the completion of the delivery, the valves were closed, which left the pipeline filled with
diesel fuel at a pressure of about 91 psig. 

About  11:58  p.m.  on  February  9,  the  supervisory  control  and  data  acquisition
(SCADA) system2 at Colonial’s Atlanta control center registered and recorded a sudden
drop in pressure from 91 to 72 psig at East Knoxville. After several minutes of oscillation,
the pressure stabilized at 73 to 74 psig. The controller on duty in the Atlanta control center
at  the  time  of  the  accident  stated  that  he  normally  displays  the  SCADA  pressure  strip
charts3  across  the  two  CRT  screens  at  the  top  of  his  operating  console.  The  SCADA

1 A  Colonial  stubline  is  a  smaller  diameter,  lateral  pipeline  system  that  emanates  from  one  of  the

company’s larger mainline pipelines that run from Texas to New York.

2 Pipeline controllers use the SCADA system to remotely control and monitor movement of product
through the pipeline. Controllers can monitor flow rates and pressures along the lines and control valves and
pipeline pumps to adjust the flow and make product deliveries.

NTSB/PAB-01/01



system did not alarm in response to the decrease in pressure, and the controller said he was
not aware of the pressure drop. As determined later, the pressure drop occurred when the
pipeline  leading  to  East  Knoxville  ruptured  on  a  Pitner  Place  residential  property  near
Knoxville’s Goose Creek.

On the east side of the Tennessee River, Colonial’s pipeline crosses Scottish Pike
and then Pitner Place. Between midnight and 12:15 a.m. on February 10, a Scottish Pike
resident walking outside his home smelled a kerosene odor, but he said he took no action
in regard to the smell. At 1:02 a.m. on February 10, a resident of Pitner Place called 911 to
report a very strong diesel or gasoline odor in the area. The Knoxville Fire Department
responded and concluded that the reported odors came from an asphalt plant across the
river from the community. Thus believing this odor did not pose any further concern but
was merely a nuisance odor, the firefighters cancelled the fire call and left the scene.

About 2:05 a.m., another Pitner Place resident closer to the pipe rupture, called 911
to report a very strong petroleum gas odor in the area. The fire department returned to the
scene  to  investigate.  Again,  the  fire  company  attributed  the  odor  to  the  nearby  asphalt
plant. At  2:17 a.m.,  a Knoxville  area  resident  called 911  to  report  oil on  the  Tennessee
River.

Meanwhile,  the  Atlanta  controller  (still  unaware  of  the  drop  in  the  pipeline
pressure) called the Knoxville operator to start another product delivery to East Knoxville.
About  2:31  a.m.,  the  Knoxville  operator  began  operating  valves  to  send  product  to  the
East Knoxville delivery facility. The Atlanta controller observed that the East Knoxville
meter indicated no flow rate and that the pressure did not rise as expected at Knoxville.
The Knoxville operator said that after waiting 4 to 5 minutes for the flow rate to register
on  his  CRT  screen,  he  called  the  Atlanta  controller  about  the  situation.  The  Atlanta
controller  called  the  senior  controller  for  his  shift  over  to  the  console  to  discuss  the
pipeline data, at which point the senior controller decided to terminate the delivery on the
East Knoxville line. About 2:39 a.m., the Knoxville operator began shutting down the East
Knoxville pipeline section and resumed using the stubline to make a delivery to another
Knoxville terminal. 

After  shutting  down  the  line,  about  2:44  a.m.,  the  Knoxville  operator  called
another  Colonial  employee  at  home  and  asked  him  to  check  out  the  East  Knoxville
delivery  facility.  In  a  discussion  with  the  Knoxville  operator  at  3:01  a.m.,  the  Atlanta
controller suggested that the pipeline might have been in a slack condition (only partially
filled  with  product)  when  the  delivery  started,  but  he  added  that  the  pipeline  pressure
should have increased faster at that time. In that discussion, he also said that the pipeline
was 600 to 700 barrels short. 

The hourly over/short calculation shown on the controller’s log for the line showed
a  shortage  of  725  barrels at  3:00  a.m.  After  the  accident,  the  Atlanta  controller  said  he
considered the shortage “high.” He also said that 300 barrels is “getting high,” although he
believed  that  300  barrels  could  be  explained  as  a  characteristic  of  the  opening  of  a
delivery. According to Colonial procedures, a sudden loss of pressure and/or a change in

3 The SCADA system provides pressure data on a strip chart graphical display on a CRT screen, which

displays the pressure history for about the previous hour.

NTSB/PAB-01/01



flow rate are to be interpreted as conclusive evidence of a leak. As part of Colonial’s leak
detection  strategy,  controllers  are  to  immediately  investigate  and  correct  any  shortage
calculation. 

At 3:45 a.m., Knoxville Fire Department responders found fuel running into Goose
Creek, which discharges into the Tennessee River about 1/2 mile downstream. Noting a
nearby  Colonial  pipeline  marker  with  contact  information,  the  incident  commander
directed  a  Knoxville  Fire  Department  dispatcher  trainee  to  contact  Colonial  about  the
leak; however, Colonial was not notified at that time.

Meanwhile,  the  Colonial  employee  who  had  been  asked  to  check  the  East
Knoxville  facility  had  driven  by  the  site  where  an  internal  inspection  tool  had  been
removed from the pipeline on February 9 (discussed below in the “Pipeline Information”
section). About 4:00 a.m., he reported that he saw no evidence of a failure in the pipeline
at that location, nor did he find any problem at the East Knoxville facility.

Still unaware of the nature of the problem, the Knoxville operator and the called-
out Colonial employee discussed the situation with the Atlanta controller. At the end of the
discussion,  the  Atlanta  controller  decided  that  the  Knoxville  operator  should  attempt
another delivery to East Knoxville. The senior controller was not involved in the decision
to  restart  delivery.  This  time,  the  called-out  operator  would  be  observing  at  East
Knoxville.  About  4:03  a.m.,  the  operator  attempted  to  pressure  up  the  line  between
Knoxville and East Knoxville, but the pressure did not rise as expected. About 4:20 a.m.,
he again opened the East Knoxville valve to operate this pipeline section, and initially no
flow was noted at East Knoxville. After a few minutes, the pressure began to fluctuate and
a lower-than-expected flow rate was indicated. The hourly flow rate was expected to be
more than 3,000 barrels per hour (bph); however, it peaked at approximately 2,000 bph.

About 4:30 a.m., the Knoxville Fire Department found diesel fuel spraying from a
pipeline onto a Pitner Place residence and running downhill into Goose Creek, which was
about 170 feet from the rupture site. The incident commander asked the fire department
communications center dispatcher to contact Colonial and have the company shut down
the  pipeline.  The  fire  department  dispatcher,  who  was  talking  to  Colonial’s  senior
controller in Atlanta at that time, notified him of the leak and asked that the pipeline be
shut down. The senior controller immediately ordered that the Knoxville stubline be shut
down. The East Knoxville segment shutdown was completed at 4:35 a.m. At 4:46 a.m.,
the East Knoxville delivery valve was opened, and the pipeline segment was then allowed
to drain into the East Knoxville terminal. According to Colonial records, the temperature
of the product was approximately 61° F at East Knoxville.

The  ruptured  pipeline  released  approximately  53,550  gallons  (1,275  barrels)  of
diesel fuel. Fifteen people were reported to have voluntarily evacuated the immediate area
of the leak. During the first 24 hours, the leading edge of the oil slick on the Tennessee
River advanced about 6 miles downstream from Goose Creek. For the next several days,
the Tennessee River in the Knoxville area was closed to navigation as containment booms
were placed downriver. Nine collection points for escaped petroleum product were placed
downstream of the accident site. Colonial estimated that 44,016 gallons (1,048 barrels) of
product have been recovered. No fire resulted, and no injuries were reported.

NTSB/PAB-01/01



On March 3, 1999, Colonial submitted a Corrective Action Plan for Impacted Soils
and Groundwater at the Goose Creek Knoxville, Tennessee, Release Site to the Tennessee
Division of Solid Waste Management and Tennessee Division of Water Pollution Control.
The intent of the action plan was to determine the extent of the underground diesel fuel
plume and the further action needed to ensure site remediation acceptable to the State. The
corrective action plan called for the excavation of all contaminated soils at the leak site
that exceeded 500 parts per million, in accordance with Tennessee underground storage
tank guidance cleanup guidelines.

Approximately  18,000 tons  of  contaminated  soil were excavated  at  the  leak  site
area  during  March  and  April  1999.  The  excavated  soil  was  transported  to  Waste
Management’s Chestnut Ridge Landfill for disposal under the approval of the Tennessee
Division of Solid Waste Management. A well survey conducted shortly after the release
found  no  residential  wells  in  the  leak  site  area.  The  limited  amount  of  affected
groundwater encountered was treated on site. The March 3 plan stated that because the
affected groundwater immediately discharges to Goose Creek, it would not contaminate
other  portions  of  the  shallow  groundwater  system  and  would  not  affect  deeper
groundwater. It was therefore determined that it was not necessary to install monitoring
wells at the leak site.

Community Awareness 

At the time of the spill, Colonial had in place a 14-point public education program
that it had designed to meet the requirements of 49 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
Part  195.440,  which  requires  oil  pipelines  to  conduct  public  educational  programs.4
Colonial’s public education program included mailing safety flyers to a targeted audience,
including  apartment  dwellers,  living  within  1/8  mile  of  a  pipeline.  The  company  also
provided direct mail pieces to those individuals who owned property where Colonial held
easements.  These  materials  included  an  annual  wall  calendar  and  a  Colonial  road  atlas
with  a  companion  booklet  that  contained  general  information  about  the  company.  The
atlas and booklet were distributed every 5 years. 

In  areas  where  Colonial  deemed  excavator  risk  particularly  high,  company
representatives participated in meetings to educate public officials, emergency responders,
and excavators. Additionally, the company distributed its atlas and companion booklet to
some public officials and contractors. In both 1997 and 1998, Colonial had pipeline maps
available for review at its tank farm during the emergency response coordination drills it
held with the Knoxville Fire Department. 

A  review  conducted  in  the  immediate  area  of  the  pipeline  failure  disclosed  that
Colonial pipeline easements crossed five residential properties. Colonial records indicate
that various public education items were mailed to two of these residences in November
and  December  1997.  These  items  addressed  questions  such  as  how  to  detect  a  pipeline
accident,  what  to  do  in  case  of  an  accident,  and  how  to  report  an  accident.  Thirteen

4 Under 49 CFR 195.440, each operator shall establish a continuing education program to enable the
public,  appropriate  government  organizations,  and  persons  engaged  in  excavation-related  activities  to
recognize a hazardous liquid pipeline emergency and to report it to the operator or the fire, police, or other
appropriate public officials.

NTSB/PAB-01/01



residents were interviewed. Of those, residents from two households stated that they were
aware  of  a  pipeline  in  the  immediate  area.  One  resident  recalled  receiving  a  pamphlet
explaining  Colonial’s  brush-clearing  operation;  however,  no  one  was  aware  of  any
specific reporting action or personal protection measures to take in the event of a pipeline
release, nor could they recall any safety awareness mailings from Colonial. 

The  Knoxville  Fire  Department  hazardous  materials  emergency  response
procedures  were  last  revised  and  approved  in  January  1999  by  the  Knoxville  County
Emergency  Management  Agency.  Fire  department  personnel  have  received  training  in
hazardous materials team operations provided by the Tennessee Emergency Management
Agency.  These  training  courses  cover  hazardous  materials  incident  response  (incident
command  system,  hazardous  material  identification,  notification,  protective  equipment,
etc.) at the responder, operations specialist, and technician levels.

According  to  fire  department  officials,  the  department  conducts  disaster  drills
annually. The most recent disaster drill before the accident was on September 9, 1998. The
scenario  involved  a  joint  multiagency  response  to  an  aircraft  crash  at  the  Knoxville
Airport. The last chemical transportation accident drill was conducted in November 1998.
This  simulated  an  accident  that  involved  a  highway  cargo  tank  containing  acid  and  the
release of a toxic cloud that caused two injuries. In November 1997, the Knoxville Fire
Department and Colonial conducted a joint training drill at a petroleum products terminal
in Knoxville. The scenario involved a pipeline rupture at a storage tank and a 1,000-gallon
gasoline spill. During a tour of its facility during December 1998, Colonial discussed with
Knoxville  Fire  Department  personnel  its  pipeline  delivery  system,  spill  response
procedures,  and  pipeline  location  maps  for  the  city  of  Knoxville.  In  its  review  of  this
accident,  the  Knoxville  Fire  Department  identified  internal  operations  problems  in  its
response,  including  the  use  of  trainees  and  the  fact  that  some  of  the  communications
channels  monitored  by  the  fire  department  were  not  recorded.  Also,  fire  department
officials identified an issue regarding the lack of pipeline location maps during the early
stage of the emergency, which might have helped them locate pipelines in the complaint
area. 

Pipeline Information

The pipeline was constructed in 1962 and put into service in early 1963. The pipe
installed  was  10-inch-diameter,  Grade  5L  X-42,  0.250-inch  wall  thickness,  electric
resistance weld (ERW) steel pipe. At the rupture site, the pipeline was installed on a slope
and had a slight side bend to the left below the rupture (figure 1) in the downstream flow
direction. Colonial records indicate that the pipe had asphalt enamel coating. A coating
defect (wrinkled coating) was also evident 2 to 3 feet upstream of the rupture (figure 2).
Safety Board investigators and Colonial personnel observed no visible damage to the pipe
coating  that  remained  immediately  adjacent  to  the  rupture  area  before  the  pipe  was
removed for examination. Colonial did not have a toughness requirement5 for pipe when it
was purchased for this pipeline, and no pipeline industry standards had been established at
that  time.  Since  July  13,  1990,  Colonial’s  line  pipe  purchasing  specifications  have  had
minimum  toughness  requirements  that  include,  among  other  factors,  a  minimum
acceptance criteria of 25 ft/lbs of absorbed energy at 32° F for Charpy V-Notch (Charpy)
impact tests.6   

NTSB/PAB-01/01



Rupture 

Site

Figure 1. Pipeline on slope showing side bend to the left 
beyond the rupture.

5 As  a  result  of  its  investigation  of  a  March  23,  1994,  pipeline  accident  in  Edison,  New  Jersey,  the
Safety  Board  issued  the  following  safety  recommendation  to  the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation’s
Research and Special Programs Administration (RSPA):

P-95-2
Develop  toughness  standards  for  new  pipe  installed  in  gas  and  hazardous  liquid  pipelines,
especially in urban areas.

In June 1995, in response to a request from RSPA, the American Petroleum Institute (API) organized a task
group  to  revise  the  specification  for  line  pipe,  API  Specification  5L,  to  include  minimum  toughness
requirements. In January 2000, the revised 42nd Edition of API Specification 5L was published. It contains
two  pipe  product  specification  levels  with  Product  Specification  Level  2  (PSL-2)  having  a  required
minimum fracture toughness level for new pipe. Safety Recommendation P-95-2 remains “Open-Acceptable
Response.”

6 Charpy V-Notch impact tests that measure the energy absorbed  by a given thickness of material at a

given temperature were used to evaluate the fracture toughness of materials. 

NTSB/PAB-01/01



Rupture

Wrinkled
Coating

Figure 2. Wrinkled coating 2 to 3 feet upstream of the circumferential crack that 
terminates at the 9 o’clock position.

A hydrostatic pressure test to 649 psig was completed on February 4, 1995, on the
East  Knoxville  pipeline  segment.  The  maximum  operating  pressure  (MOP)  for  the
pipeline was determined to be 519 psig at the Knoxville station, which calculates to 552
psig at the rupture location. The allowable surge pressure, based on pipeline Federal safety
regulations (1.1 x MOP), is 571 psig at the Knoxville station and 607 psig at the rupture
location.  Colonial  records  indicate  that  the  typical  operating  pressure  at  the  rupture
location  ranges  between  72  and  250  psig,  and  the  number  of  operating  cycles  for  that
range is at least 144 per year for the East Knoxville section of the pipeline.

Internal inspections with different types of “smart pigs” were performed in 1989
and  1999.  The  1989  inspection  was  done  using  a  conventional  magnetic  flux  internal
inspection tool. The internal inspection company graded the inspection log, and no defects
were indicated at the rupture point. Colonial reported that repairs were made to other areas
of the pipeline as a result of the 1989 inspection. 

The pipeline was internally inspected again using a high-resolution magnetic flux
inspection tool on February 8, 1999. The inspection tool became stuck at one of several
dents about 4,000 feet upstream of the East Knoxville station (about 1.7 miles downstream
of  the  rupture  site).  The  pipeline  was  pressurized  a  number  of  times  to  dislodge  the
inspection tool and push it ahead. SCADA logs indicate that the pressure on the pipeline
reached 546 psig at the Knoxville station, which calculates to approximately 580 psig at
the rupture location. The effort to dislodge the tool using pressure was unsuccessful, and
on the afternoon before the rupture, the section of pipe containing the tool was cut from
the pipeline and replaced with new pipe. Product was transported through the line after the

NTSB/PAB-01/01



repair.  The  high-resolution magnetic flux  inspection indicated no  defects such as  dents,
gouges, or significant corrosion at the failure location.

Colonial  uses  an  impressed  current  cathodic  protection7  system  to  protect  its
pipelines.  Company  records  indicate  that  the  rectifier  system  was  operating  properly
before  the  accident.  Annual  corrosion  survey  records  for  3  years  prior  to  the  accident
indicate the pipe-to-soil potential levels8 were  –0.85 volt or more negative with reference
to a copper-copper sulfate reference electrode.9 

Materials Laboratory Examination

When the pipe was exposed, a circumferential crack was found around the top half
of the pipe’s diameter (figure 3), and no pipe coating remained in the area of the crack.
The crack was not located in a girth weld, visible dent, or gouge; however, the crack ran
through an area of surface corrosion. Close examination of the fracture surface established
that  the  crack  initiated  at  an  area  with  at  least  nine  separate  darkly  colored  thumbnail-
shaped  corroded  regions  (thumbnails).  The  failure  initiation  region  was  centered  at  the
3 o’clock position (looking downstream, toward East Knoxville) in the area of the external
surface  corrosion.  The  thumbnail  shape,  dark  coloration,  and  fracture  surface  features
were consistent with corroded preexisting cracks that initiated on the external surface of
the  pipe  and  propagated  radially  inward.  None  of  these  preexisting  cracks  penetrated
through the pipe wall, with 0.120-inch being the deepest penetration observed, which was
48 percent of the nominal pipe wall thickness. Similar corroded preexisting cracks were
noted nearby in the surface corrosion area.

The  crack  ran  in  both  directions  from  its  initiation  point.  The  crack  propagated
clockwise past the longitudinal weld seam. In the clockwise direction, the brittle fracture
extended less than 0.5 inch before changing to a ductile fracture. In the counterclockwise
direction,  the  brittle  fracture  extended  over  the  top  of  the  pipe  to  approximately  the
9 o’clock position, where it also terminated in a ductile fracture. (Refer to figure 2.) 

Scanning  electron  microscope  examination  of  the  fracture  face  revealed  heavy
oxide deposits on the thumbnails that obscured some and obliterated other fracture details;
however, sufficient detail was visible to indicate that the thumbnails originated at shallow
corrosion pits on the external surface. Each of the thumbnail regions was associated with
surface  corrosion  damage  and  typically  had  one  or  two  crack  origin  sites.  In  some

7 Cathodic  protection  is  a  corrosion  mitigation  method  used  by  the  pipeline  industry  to  protect
underground metal pipes. The system uses rectifier stations along the pipeline to supply protective electrical
current.  Cathodic  protection  current  is  forced  to  flow  in  the  opposite  direction  of  currents  produced  by
corrosion cells. A rectifier converts alternating current from the utility service to direct current and supplies
it to a ground bed that typically contains a string of suitable anodes, with soil as an electrolyte, to provide a
path for the current from the rectifier to the pipeline. A cable connected to the pipeline provides the return
path to complete the circuit.

8 The  pipe-to-soil  potential  is  defined  as  “the  voltage  difference  between  a  buried  metallic structure
[pipe]  and  the  electrolyte  [soil],  measured  with  a  reference  electrode  in  contact  with  the  soil.”  From
H.L. Gordon, Cathodic Protection, Power Plant Electrical Reference Series, Project 2334, Electric Power
Research Institute, Palo Alto, California, 1991, vol. 11, p. 11.2.

9 Pipeline companies perform pipe-to-soil potential surveys by measuring and recording the voltages
and currents at test stations along the pipeline and at rectifiers. Measurement intervals vary widely from less
than 100 feet in some locations to several miles in others.

NTSB/PAB-01/01



Figure 3. Circumferential crack on top half of pipe with failure initiation region at the 
3 o’clock position.

instances, crack arrest marks were visible within the thumbnail regions. The preexisting
crack  features  in  the  failure  initiating  area  were  consistent  with  environment-induced
cracking.10 

After  the  accident,  Colonial  had  an  independent  lab  perform  Charpy  tests  on
specimens prepared from the failed pipe joint. Longitudinal pipe specimens were tested at
temperatures ranging between 25° and 170° F. The full-size energy values11 for absorbed
energy in the longitudinal direction were from 3.4 to 21.8 ft/lbs between 25° and 65° F,
and 40.2 ft/lbs at 85° F. The results between 105° and 170° F were from 62 to 77.1 ft/lbs.

The Safety Board also had Charpy testing performed on test specimens taken in
proximity  to  the  rupture.  The  tests  were  conducted  in  both  the  longitudinal  and
circumferential direction at a range of temperatures between 0° and 85° F. The test results
in the longitudinal direction indicate absorbed energy values from 4.2 to 15 ft/lbs between
0° and 65° F, and 54 ft/lbs at 85° F. The results in the circumferential direction indicate
values from 4.6 to 22 ft/lbs between 0° and 85° F. 

10 Environment-induced cracking occurs due to the combined effects  of tensile stress and a corrosive
environment. If a susceptible material under static tensile stress is exposed to a specific corrosive medium,
the failure is defined as stress corrosion cracking. If the material is exposed to cyclic tensile stresses in a
corrosive environment, the failure is defined as corrosion fatigue.

11 Sub-size  specimens  were  tested  and  full-size  energy  values  were  calculated  in  accordance  with

ASTM  E23 for all Charpy absorbed energy data.

NTSB/PAB-01/01

Actions Taken Since the Accident

10

Since the accident, Colonial has updated its public education program to reach a
target audience within a minimum of 1/4 mile of its pipeline operating area, regardless of
whether the property is traversed by a pipeline easement. Colonial has also updated the
educational  information  in  its  safety  pamphlet  and  upgraded  the  method  by  which  the
safety information is communicated to the target audience. Colonial has also updated its
public education program mailings to better reach its target audience. The first paragraph
of  each  educational  mailing  now  encourages  the  initial  reader  to  share  the  information
with all members of the household.

In  addition,  Colonial  has  upgraded  its  written  procedures  for  establishing  and
maintaining liaison with fire, police, and other agencies that might respond to a hazardous
liquid  pipeline  emergency.  The  procedures  identify  the  methods  to  be  used,  the
information to be shared, and the frequency of the contacts.

Since  the  Knoxville  accident,  Colonial’s  control  center  operations  manual  for
abnormal  and  emergency  operations  has  been  amended  to  include  the  following:  “Any
time  an  unscheduled  shutdown  occurs,  the  line  will  only  be  re-started  with  the
concurrence of a Senior Controller.” At the time of the accident, Colonial’s control center
operations  manual  directed  that  for  continuous  minor  hourly  shortages,  the  controller
would  investigate  by  having  all  active  facilities  “prove”  (verify  the  accuracy  of)  the
meters.  If  proving  meters  did  not  correct  the  shortages,  controllers  were  to  contact  the
senior  controller  for  a  decision  to  possibly  pressure-test  the  line  or  shut  it  down  for
inspection.  Colonial’s  control  center  operations  manual  for  emergency  operations
involving leaks or suspected leaks has been amended to include the following: 

Any time a line is shut down to investigate a continuous minor hourly shortage,
the line will only be re-started with the concurrence of a representative from the
Engineering Services Team.

Colonial  is  using  the  details surrounding  this  event  in  various  training scenarios
and  has  added  the  Knoxville  accident  scenario  to  its  maximum  critical  event  training.
Colonial uses simulator training as part of its controller training.

Colonial  is  continuing  its  efforts  to  install  an  automated  leak  detection  system.
Colonial  is  currently  installing  a  batch  tracking  system  on  a  Colonial  stubline  system
similar to the one involved in this accident. This new system is expected to aid the pipeline
controller in identifying variances in the amount of product shipped versus the amount of
product delivered. Any discrepancies identified above a predetermined threshold will be
investigated as a possible leak. Colonial has experienced some difficulty in completing the
installation of this system but anticipates completion in the first half of 2001. Once the
first  system  is  successfully  installed,  Colonial  anticipates  installing  the  batch  tracking
system  on  other  stublines.  When  all  the  stublines  are  addressed,  Colonial  anticipates
attempting to apply the same batch tracking system to the company’s mainlines, although
the company expressed some concern about the effect that the size and the complexity of
the mainlines will have on the performance of the batch tracking system.

Colonial is developing a formal, documented strategic plan on how to approach the
identification,  evaluation,  and  application  of  technology  to  leak  detection  on  Colonial’s

NTSB/PAB-01/01

11

system. This plan is scheduled to be fully developed in 2001. The objective of the plan is
to  find  and  implement  effective  means  of  leak  detection  and  to  comply  with  the  new
Office  of  Pipeline  Safety  regulations  on  integrity  management  of  pipelines  that  affect
high-consequences areas.

The  Knoxville  Fire  Department  incident  commander  held  a  postaccident
debriefing with Knoxville communication center personnel, established  new procedures
for  the  communications  center,  and  requested  that  Colonial  provide  maps  for  fire
department use. Because of the delay in notifying Colonial that occurred in this accident,
procedures have been changed so that (1) the communications center will not rely solely
on dispatcher trainees during periods of heavy workload; (2) the supervisors will assist the
dispatcher  during  periods  of  heavy  workload;  and  (3)  the  communications  center  will
record  all  communications  channels  to  create  a  record  of  emergency  response
conversations.

Also  at  the  request  of  the  Knoxville  Fire  Department,  Colonial  provided  the
department with pipeline location maps to be carried by fire department units responding
to calls involving the possible release of hazardous materials. The department also uses
the maps during annual fire department training sessions at the Colonial terminal facility.

Probable Cause

The National Transportation  Safety Board determines that the probable cause of
this  accident  was  pipe  rupture  initiated  by  environment-induced  cracking  in  an  area  of
pipe  coating  failure.  A  contributing  factor  to  the  failure  was  the  relatively  low  fracture
toughness of the pipe. Contributing to the severity of the accident was Colonial Pipeline
Company’s failure to determine from the supervisory control and data acquisition system
that a leak had occurred, with the result that the pipeline controller started and restarted the
pipeline, thereby increasing the amount of diesel fuel that was released. 

Approved: March 28, 2001

NTSB/PAB-01/01

