R A SP

N
 

O

E P L U RIBUS UNUM 

R

T

A

T

I

O
N

NAL  T

 

O
I
T
A
N

 

S

AFETY

 

 B O A R D

 

National Transportation Safety Board 

Washington, D.C. 20594 

 

Pipeline Accident Brief 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Accident No.:   
System Type:   
Accident Type: 
Location: 
 
 
Date:  
Time:  
 
Owner/Operator: 
Property Damage and Losses:  
 
 
Fatalities: 
 
 
Injuries: 
 
Material Released: 
 
 
 
Pressure: 
 
 
Failure Type:   
 
Component Affected:  
 

 
 

DCA-04-MP-006 
Natural gas distribution 
Leak, explosion, and fire 
DuBois, Pennsylvania 
August 21, 2004 
About 8:54 a.m. eastern daylight time1  
National Fuel Gas Distribution Corporation 
$800,000 
2 
None 
Natural gas 
50 pounds per square inch, gauge  
Butt-fusion joint leak 
2-inch plastic main line 

The Accident 

On  August  21,  2004,  about  8:54  a.m.,  a  natural  gas  explosion  destroyed  a  residence 
located  at  48  Woodland  Lane  in  DuBois,  Pennsylvania.  The  two  residents  were  killed  in  this 
accident. (See figure 1.) 

Postaccident Investigation 

National Fuel Gas Distribution Corporation (National Fuel) probed the ground near the 
residence for gas leaks. Combustible gas-to-air readings were found in two areas: one area was 
adjacent to the affected residence, and the other area was directly over the failed pipe on the front 
lawn.  After  the  explosion,  National  Fuel  excavated  the  front  lawn.  The  excavation  revealed  a 
leaking butt-fusion joint in a 2-inch-diameter plastic main line pipe. (See figure 2.) 

A butt-fusion joint is made by the following process. A heater plate is inserted between 
two pipe ends, melting the material on each end. The heater is then removed, and the pipe ends 
are pushed together under applied force. The pipe ends remain under applied force as the pipe 
ends cool and fuse together. The butt-fusion process forces excess molten plastic onto the inside 
and outside of the pipe surfaces. Because both sides of the pipe are molten, two visible beads are 
formed on the exterior and interior of the pipe joint. (See figure 3.) When this material cools and 
solidifies, it is called a fusion bead.  
                                                 

1 All times in this brief are eastern daylight time. 

                                                                                                                            NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

Figure 1. Damage to 48 Woodland Lane. 

National Fuel began excavating the accident site before National Transportation Safety 
Board investigators arrived. During the excavation, National Fuel accidentally severed the plastic 
pipe within a few feet of the butt-fusion joint. Because of this mishap, Safety Board investigators 
could  not  determine  the  undisturbed  position  of  the  pipe  to  assess  its  bending.  Only  a  small 
ligament  remained  connected  at  the  butt-fusion  joint,  making  it  impossible  to  directly  test  the 
strength of the joint. 

The Safety Board’s examination of the butt-fusion joint linked to the explosion indicates 
that  the  bead  widths  were  not  uniform.2  The  bead  width  on  one  side  of  the  butt-fusion  joint 
ranged from 0.0535 inch to 0.1135 inch. On the other side of the joint, the bead width ranged 
from 0.0745 inch to 0.1060 inch. The total bead width ranged from 0.1315 inch to 0.2045 inch. 
The  joint  was  found  to  have  been  visibly  mitered,3  having  about  a  2°  angle.  Mitering  can 
concentrate  stresses.  No  evidence  was  found  indicating  that  the  joint  was  significantly 
misaligned.4  

                                                 
Preaccident. 

2  See  butt-fusion  criteria  discussed  in  the  section  titled  Butt-Fusion  Procedures  and  Inspection  Criteria, 

3 Mitered means a butt-fusion joint that is not joined with an 180° angle from each pipe. In this report, mitering 
refers  to  a  small  angle  made  unintentionally  in  the field, not  a  large  angle  made  intentionally  as  a pipe bend. A 
visible miter is a joint that has an angle detectable by the unaided eye.  

4 Misaligned means a butt-fusion joint in which the two pipes are not evenly lined up relative to each other, 

exhibiting a high-low disjuncture at the point of fusion. 

                                                                    2                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

 

Figure 2. Excavated butt-fusion joint. 

 

 

                                                                    3                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

Figure 3. Optimal butt-fusion joint as illustrated in Uponor’s Heat Fusion Installer 
Qualification Manual. 

 

 

At the same location where the external bead width was thinnest, the bead was distorted. 
The  external  bead  on  one  side  of  the  joint  was  larger  than  the  bead  on  the  other  side.  The 
boundary between the two beads was indistinct. The internal bead was also distorted, with the 
bead on one side of the joint higher than the other side. On one side of the joint, the internal bead 
had  numerous  pockmarks.5  On  the  other  side,  small  globules  of  plastic  adhered  to  the  bead, 
which is consistent with material being pulled from one bead and deposited on the other bead 
when the joint was made.   

The fracture between the two pipe ends closely followed the plane of the center of the 
butt-fusion joint. (See figure 4.) The external bead remained attached to one piece of the pipe, 
and the internal bead remained attached to the other piece of the pipe. (See figure 5.) 

                                                 

5 Pockmarks may indicate a less than optimal butt fusion. 

                                                                    4                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

Figure 4. Fractured end showing external bead and plane of fracture at center of 
butt-fusion joint. 

 

Figure 5. View of fracture surface on one piece of pipe. Pipe is oriented as it was 
found. Fracture origin was at 9 o’clock position as shown. Unlabeled arrows 
indicate crack propagation directions. 

                                                                    5                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

 

The fracture surfaces at the butt-fusion joint were examined using optical microscopy and 
an environmental scanning electron microscope. The fracture surface exhibited voids where the 
internal and external beads were distorted. (See figure 6.) Fracture surface features indicated that 
the crack initiated near the center of the pipe wall within the butt-fusion joint, followed by a slow 
progressive crack growth.6 Ductile ribbons of plastic pipe material present at the inner and outer 
edges of the fracture surface indicated that the crack did not initiate at the notches7 of either the 
internal or external beads. 

Studies of butt-fusion joints subjected to elevated temperature and high pressure indicate 
that a fracture occurring in the butt-fusion area will normally start on the pipe wall surface at the 
notch of the internal bead or, if bending is involved, the fracture would be expected to start at the 
outer pipe wall surface. However, the initiation of the fracture in the accident pipe near the center 
of the pipe wall is consistent with inadequate fusion of the joint.  

 

Figure 6. Voids in central portion of fracture surface. 

                                                 
6  See  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  Brittle-like  Cracking  in  Plastic  Pipe  for  Gas  Service,  Special 
Investigation  Report  NTSB/SIR-98/01  (Washington,  DC:  NTSB,  1998),  for  additional  information  regarding 
progressive crack growth. 

7  As  the bead rolls  back,  a notch  is  formed  between  the bead  and  the wall  of  the  pipe. Stress  concentration 

increases in the area of the notch. 

                                                                    6                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

The butt-fusion joint that joined the two coiled plastic pipes8 involved in this accident 
was made on January 10, 1996, using a machine called the McElroy 14, which is manufactured 
by  McElroy  Manufacturing,  Inc.  (McElroy).  The  two  plastic  pipes  were  manufactured  in 
different years. One pipe was manufactured on May 16, 1995; the other was manufactured on 
October 5, 1994. Uponor Aldyl Company (Uponor) manufactured both medium-density9 pipes. 
According  to  written  certifications  from  Uponor,  the  pipe  met  the  requirements  of  ASTM  
D-2513,  “Standard  Specification  for  Thermoplastic  Gas  Pressure  Pipe,  Tubing,  and  Fittings.” 
Laboratory testing of the accident pipe determined that the dimensions, density, and melt index 
were within Uponor’s production specifications. 

Butt-Fusion Procedures and Inspection Criteria 

Preaccident 

Uponor  had  a  butt-fusion  joining  procedure,  adopted  in  December  1991,  for  its  pipe 
product.  Uponor  qualified  its  joining  procedure  in  accordance  with  Title  49  Code  of  Federal 
Regulations  (CFR)  192.283.10  As  a  service  to  National  Fuel  and  other  pipeline  companies, 
Uponor provided its procedure.  

National  Fuel  had  its  own  procedure  for  making  butt-fusion  joints.  The  butt-fusion 
joining  procedures  for  National  Fuel  and  Uponor  were  similar.  The  National  Fuel  butt-fusion 
procedure was adopted in February 1993. National Fuel made butt-fusion joints using a variety 
of machines. The company inspected and certified its butt-fusion machines in accordance with its 
procedures.  

Uponor  published  a  set  of  key  visual  inspection  criteria  for  identifying  an  acceptable  
butt-fusion joint. These criteria were in effect in 1996 at the time the fusion joint involved in the 
accident  was  made.  As  stated  in  Uponor’s  inspection  criteria  (adjacent  to  photographs  of  
butt-joint fusions), key visual criteria for a good-quality fusion included the following:  

•  Uniform bead development on both pipe ends 
•  Bead rolled back to pipe 
•  No misalignment between pipe ends 

                                                 
8  Butt  fusion  of  coiled  pipe  is  considered  more  difficult  than  fusion  of  straight  pipe  because  the  residual 
curvature makes it difficult to obtain an optimal alignment and reduce mitering. Proper procedures and equipment 
and extra care are necessary if high-quality joints are to be consistently produced. 

9 Medium density is characterized in ASTM D-2513. ASTM is now known as ASTM International, one of the 
largest  voluntary  standards  development  organizations  in  the  world.  ASTM  was  originally  an  abbreviation  for 
American Society for Testing and Materials. 

10 Title 49 CFR 192.283 is issued by the U.S. Department of Transportation Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration in Part 192, “Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety 
Standards;” Subpart F, “Joining of Materials Other Than by Welding;” Section 192.283, “Plastic pipe: Qualifying 
joining procedures.” 

                                                                    7                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

In addition, the Uponor procedure stated that joints not meeting these visual criteria had to be 
remade before being placed into service. The Uponor procedure further stated, “If the pipe ends 
are not aligned, adjust them in the shells and . . . [start over].” This procedure did not address 
mitering. 

National Fuel essentially used Uponor’s inspection criteria. As part of its procedure for 
making a butt-fusion joint, National Fuel required the fuser11 to inspect the completed joint for 
conformity  with  its  criteria.  National  Fuel’s  procedure  also  stated,  “If  there  is  any  reason  to 
believe a butt fusion is defective, it shall be removed and replaced.” 

Safety  Board  investigators  interviewed  two  current  and  two  retired  National  Fuel 
employees  familiar  with  National  Fuel’s  fusion  procedures  and  training  at  the  time  when  the 
subject  butt-fusion  joint  was  made.  The  four  interviewees  included  two  master  trainers  who 
conducted initial qualification training and two foremen who requalified personnel in the field 
based on instructions from the master trainers. The interviewees stated that National Fuel had 
verbal instructions in effect in 1996 advising its fusers not to allow a visual miter; however, this 
guidance was not found in its written operating procedures.  

The butt-fusion joint linked to the explosion was made with a 500-foot length of 2-inch 
coiled pipe that was butt fused to a previously installed 2-inch coiled pipe using the McElroy 14. 
According to the National Fuel butt-fusion procedure, the fusion required the fuser to apply 15 to 
20 foot-pounds with the machine, which would have resulted in a joining force on the pipe ends 
of 165 to 215 pounds. A 500-foot roll of 2-inch plastic pipe weighs approximately 315 pounds. 
Depending on the placement of the pipe roll, the drag caused by the weight of the pipe roll could 
have  been  negligible  or  significant.  The  written  procedures  of  Uponor,  National  Fuel,  and 
McElroy did not account for drag force;12 however, McElroy’s onsite training program provided 
instructions to fusers so that they could determine in the field the drag force for a butt-fusion 
joint. Among the four National Fuel interviewees, there was variation in the level of knowledge 
regarding drag force and the need to compensate for its effects. 

Current 

Since  the  accident,  the  PWPoly  Corporation  has  acquired  Uponor.  The  combined 
businesses  of  PWPoly  Corporation  and  Uponor  operate  under  the  name  USPoly  Company 
(USPoly).  Today,  USPoly  continues  to  manufacture  medium-density  pipe,  but  it  no  longer 
manufactures the type of pipe involved in this accident.    

USPoly’s March 5, 2000, pipe joining procedure addresses the methods for joining coiled 
pipe using butt fusion and recommends that drag force be determined on a case-by-case basis. Its 
procedure requires that the completed joint be inspected and prescribes that any joint not meeting 
                                                 

11 A fuser is a person who makes fusion joints. 
12 The fusion of a long or heavy segment of pipe is different from the fusion of two small segments of plastic 
pipe. Drag force is the force required to move the pipe to be joined. If this drag force is not added before applying 
the joining force, the proper joining force may not be applied.   

                                                                    8                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

visual inspection criteria be remade. The USPoly procedure does not address mitering. USPoly’s 
key visual inspection criteria for its medium-density pipe product include the following:  

•  Complete and uniform beads 
•  Bead rolled back to pipe 
•  Alignment  

The Plastics Pipe Institute (PPI) is the major trade association representing the plastics 
piping  industry.  The  PPI  publishes  universal  fusion  procedures  that  are  widely  accepted 
throughout  the  pipeline  industry.  PPI’s  current  butt-fusion  joint  procedure,  published  in  late 
2005, recommends that the drag force be determined on a case-by-case basis. The PPI procedure 
does  not  address  the  joining  of  coiled  pipe  or  the  avoidance  of  mitering.  The  PPI  procedure 
includes an illustration of a properly made butt-fusion joint, but it does not specifically address 
inspecting the finished joint. 

In  November  2000,  McElroy,  the  manufacturer  of  the  McElroy  14,  established  
butt-fusion  procedures  that  recommend  determining  drag  force  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  In 
addition, McElroy specifies using PPI’s fusion procedures or the pipe manufacturer’s procedures 
for certain fusion parameters, such as joining force and holding time.  

ASTM  D-2657,  “Standard  Practice  for  Heat  Fusion  Joining  of  Polyolefin  Pipe  and 
Fittings,” contains a general butt-fusion joint procedure. The ASTM procedure requires the use 
of PPI or pipe-manufacturer procedures to specify the fusion parameters. The ASTM procedure 
further  prescribes  inspecting  the  finished  joint  in  accordance  with  recommended  appearance 
guidelines. The ASTM procedure also addresses calculating and using a drag force. 

National Fuel’s current butt-fusion procedure,13 published in May 2005, addresses joining 
coiled pipe. This procedure adds a predetermined fixed drag force for some fusion machines. As 
a  part  of  its  operating  procedure,  National  Fuel  requires  the  fuser  to  inspect  the  completed  
butt-fusion joint. This visual examination of the butt fusion includes proper alignment, no miter, 
complete bead rollover, relatively uniform beads, and proper bead width. National Fuel’s current 
procedure states, “If there is any reason to believe the butt fusion is defective, it shall be removed 
and  replaced.”  A  butt-fusion  joint  made  by  a  fuser  in  the  field  is  subject  to  inspection  by  a 
foreman. Since January 1, 2000, National Fuel’s Quality Assurance/Quality Control department 
has  been  performing  periodic  field  audits  that  sometimes  include  inspections  of  butt  fusions, 
depending  upon  the  subject  of  the  audit.  The  fusers  have  been  required  to  use  a  permanent 
marker  to  write  their  employee  identification  number  on  their  butt  -fusion  joints  since  
January 2001.  

                                                 
straight pipe can be butt fused to coiled pipe. 

13  National  Fuel’s  current  policy  does  not  permit  two  segments  of  coiled  pipe  to  be  butt  fused;  however,  a 

                                                                    9                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

Qualification of Fusion Personnel 

Preaccident 

Title 49 CFR 192.285 required that all personnel making plastic pipe joints be qualified 
under the applicable joining procedure. To qualify, the applicant had to have appropriate training 
or  experience  using  the  procedure  and  had  to  produce  at  least  one  joint  using  it.  These  joints 
were  visually  examined  and  mechanically  tested  by  one  of  several  approved  methods,  which 
included pressure testing, tensile testing, and cutting the joint into a minimum of three strips and 
bending them to failure. This testing was required for qualification and requalification.  

Two qualified fusers were on the National Fuel work crew that installed the 2-inch plastic 
pipe on January 10, 1996. One of these fusers signed a form indicating that he had made the  
butt-fusion joint where the failure occurred. He also signed the chart of the final pressure test 
before this pipeline segment was placed in service.  

According to National Fuel records, both work crew fusers passed their original plastic 
pipe butt-fusion qualification tests. Both work crew fusers requalified in 1994, 1995, and 1996. 
During  their  requalification  tests,  they  used  a  variety  of  butt-fusion  machines,  including  the 
McElroy 14. Their requalification testing was performed in accordance with 49 CFR 192.285. 
Their requalification records indicate that they received a review of procedures. The fusers were 
not given a written examination, and records did not reflect whether they were requalified using 
coiled or straight pipe. Neither crew fuser, according to National Fuel records, had a documented 
failed joint. 

Current  

In its fuser qualification plan, National Fuel has two levels of training and qualification: 
initial qualification and requalification. New employees who produce plastic fusions and fitting 
installations are required to take an initial training course. The course reviews the National Fuel 
procedures, best practices for plastic material installation, and fusion and mechanical coupling 
installation. Individuals performing plastic joining are requalified on an annual basis. Both the 
initial and requalification programs include instructional videos, reviews of updated or changed 
operating procedures, and changes in materials or products. Both a written test and a practical 
exam are given. The trainee must be able to differentiate between acceptable and unacceptable 
fusions. The trainee is required to make test joints that may or may not be made from coiled pipe. 
These joints are visually examined by the trainer and then evaluated by mechanical testing. To 
qualify  an  individual  for  the  inspection  of  fused  plastic  pipe,  National  Fuel  requires  the 
individual to pass either a written or an oral examination and to understand how to determine that 
a joint meets National Fuel’s acceptance criteria. On March 8, 2004, two Pennsylvania Public 
Utility  Commission  (PUC)  inspectors  audited  National  Fuel’s  program.  No  issue  regarding 
National Fuel’s butt-fusion operator qualifications was identified in the audit report. 

                                                                    10                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

Additional Fusions Removed from DuBois 

The Pennsylvania PUC supervised the excavation and visual inspection of an additional 
40  joints  from  an  area  in  the  vicinity  of  the  accident  that  were  made  in  either  1994  or  1996. 
Inspectors  from  the  Pennsylvania  PUC  removed  24  of  the  joints  and  submitted  them  to  the 
Safety Board for laboratory analysis.  

Of the 24 joints examined at the Safety Board’s Materials Laboratory, 5 were made from 
straight pipe, and 19 were made from coiled pipe. The five joints made from straight pipe were 
found to have sufficiently uniform beads, complete bead rollover, no visible miter, and proper 
alignment. 

About half of the 19 joints made from coiled pipe had visible variation in bead width, but 
all were relatively uniform. All of the 19 joints had complete bead rollover. The 19 joints had 
miter angles that were greater than those on the straight pipe joints; the miter angles for the joints 
made from coiled pipe ranged from 0.7° to 4.2°. The average angle of the miter for the 19 joints 
was 2.08°. Thirteen of the 19 joints made from coiled pipe had a misalignment in excess of that 
allowed by National Fuel and Uponor. Two joints had an area that separated in the joint during 
tensile testing. These two joints had regions of poor bonding in the fusion area; one of the joints 
exhibited voids similar to those observed on the fracture surface of the accident joint.  

Records  to  identify  a  specific  fuser  with  any  of  the  24  joints  examined  by  the  
Safety Board’s Materials Laboratory were unavailable. National Fuel records show that in 1994 
there were nine qualified fusers and in 1996 there were seven qualified fusers who could make 
butt-fusion joints in the DuBois Service Center area.  

Gas System Performance Monitoring 

Federal  regulations  (49  CFR  192.613  and  192.617)  require  that  gas  pipeline  system 
operators have procedures in place for monitoring the performance of their gas systems. These 
procedures  must  cover  surveillance  of  gas  system  failures  and  leakage  history,  analysis  of 
failures,  submission  of  failed  samples  for  laboratory  examination  (to  determine  the  causes  of 
failure), and minimizing the possibility of future recurrences. National Fuel has reported that it is 
revising its surveillance and analysis program to address the integrity of butt-fusion joints. 

Probable Cause 

The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of the leak, 
explosion, and fire in DuBois, Pennsylvania, on August 21, 2004, was the fracture of a defective 
butt-fusion  joint  and  the  failure  of  the  National  Fuel  Gas  Distribution  Corporation  to  have  an 
adequate program to inspect butt-fusion joints and replace those joints not meeting its inspection 
criteria. 

                                                                    11                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

Recommendations 

accident, 
recommendations: 

As a result of its investigation of the August 21, 2004, DuBois, Pennsylvania, pipeline 
safety 

the  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  makes 

the 

following 

To the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission: 

Require  an  analysis  of  the  integrity  of  butt-fusion  joints  in  National  Fuel  Gas 
Distribution Corporation’s gas distribution system and replacement of those joints 
that are determined to have unacceptable characteristics. (P-06-1) 

To National Fuel Gas Distribution Corporation: 

Revise your butt-fusion procedures for plastic pipe to include a requirement for 
determining drag force in the field for each butt-fusion joint. (P-06-2) 

Revise your initial qualification and requalification procedures for plastic gas pipe 
to  ensure  fusers  produce  test  joints  made  from  coiled  pipe  with  characteristics 
similar to those experienced in the field. (P-06-3) 

To USPoly Company: 

Revise your butt-fusion procedures to include a requirement for the avoidance of 
mitering in plastic gas pipe joints. (P-06-4) 

To the Plastics Pipe Institute: 

Revise  your  butt-fusion  joining  procedure  for  plastic  gas  pipe  to  (1)  stress  the 
importance of inspecting the finished joint, (2) include guidance on the joining of 
coiled  pipe,  and  (3)  include  a  requirement  for  the  avoidance  of  mitering.  
(P-06-5) 

 

                                                                    12                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

BY THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD 

Mark V. Rosenker 
Acting Chairman 

 

 
Adopted: May 31, 2006 

 

 

Ellen Engleman Conners 
Member 

Deborah A. P. Hersman 
Member 

Kathryn O’Leary Higgins 
Member 
 
 

                                                                    13                                                      NTSB/PAB-06/01 

 

