National Transportation Safety Board 

Washington, D.C. 20594 
Pipeline Accident Brief 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Pipeline Accident Number: 
Type of System: 
Accident Type: 
Location: 
 
Date and Time: 
Owner/Operator: 
Fatalities/Injuries: 
Damage/Clean Up Cost: 
Material Released: 
Quantity Released: 
Pipeline Pressure: 
 
Component Affected: 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DCA-00-MP-005 
Hazardous liquid 
Pipe failure and leak 
Greenville, Texas 
March 9, 2000, at 10:20 p.m., central standard time  
Explorer Pipeline Company 
None 
$18 million 
Gasoline 
Approximately 564,000 gallons 
705 pounds per square inch, gauge, (psig)  
at site of failure 
28-inch-diameter, American Petroleum Institute 
Specification 5LX, Grade X-52, 0.281-inch-wall-
thickness, DSAW (double seam submerged-arc 
welded) steel pipe 

 

The Accident 

On March 9, 2000, about 10:20 p.m., central standard time,1 a 28-inch-diameter 
pipeline  owned  and  operated  by  Explorer  Pipeline  Company  (Explorer)  ruptured  and 
released  13,436 barrels  (about  564,000 gallons)  of  gasoline.  The  pipeline  was  buried 
about 4 feet 6 inches under ranch land. The release site was near Greenville, Texas, about 
45 miles northeast of Dallas. 

Explorer’s  Greenville  pumping  station  on  the  28-inch  pipeline  was  about 
10.3 miles south and upstream of the rupture site. This station automatically shut down its 
two running pumping units when the rupture occurred. Before the failure, the pipeline had 
been  in  steady-state  operation,  and  its  flow  rate  was  approximately  20,000  barrels  per 
hour.  About  2 minutes  after  the  rupture  and  the  automatic  shutdown  of  the  Greenville 
pumping station, the pipeline controller (located in Tulsa, Oklahoma) started a different 
pumping unit at the Greenville pumping station in an effort to keep the entire pipeline 
balanced  and  operating.  Meanwhile,  the  operator  of  the  Greenville  pumping  station 
attempted to determine the cause of the automatic shutdown of his pumping units. The 
pumping  unit  that  the  controller  had  started  also  shut  down  automatically  after  about 
2 minutes. The controller shut down the entire line. After a few minutes, thinking that the 

                                                 
1 All times reported are central standard time. 

NTSB/PAB-01/03 
 

 

2 

cause of the initial shutdown had been a control valve problem, the controller restarted 
the line at a reduced rate. About 13 minutes later (around 10:49 p.m.), the controller shut 
the entire line down for evaluation. 

Leak Reporting and Response 

Individuals near the rupture began calling 911 soon after the pipeline failure. Other 
residents who detected the odor of gasoline called Explorer personnel because they were 
aware that the Explorer pipeline passed through the area.  

The released gasoline flowed a few hundred feet across the surrounding terrain and 
into a dry creek bed, which was a tributary to East Caddo Creek. From the tributary, the 
gasoline flowed downstream into East Caddo Creek. The banks of the tributary and creek 
contained the escaping gasoline as it flowed away from the ruptured pipe. 

Explorer  closed  remotely  operated  valves  at  pump  stations  about  10:59 p.m.  to 
isolate the ruptured section of pipeline. By 11:05 p.m., Explorer personnel were on the 
scene and meeting with emergency responders. About midnight, a local contractor arrived 
on  the  scene  to  construct  dams  across  East  Caddo  Creek  to  stop  the  flow  of  gasoline. 
About 1:30 a.m., Explorer personnel manually closed a mainline valve to further isolate 
the rupture area. 

By morning, three dams had been constructed across the East Caddo Creek. The 
leading edge of the escaping gasoline was eventually contained about 2 1/2 miles from 
the rupture site. Then, about 8:30 a.m. the morning after the rupture, heavy rains began to 
fall. The rain lasted throughout much of the day. An estimated 1.5 to 2 inches of rain fell 
in  the  area,  and  East  Caddo  Creek  rose  about  12 feet.  The  rising  waters  destroyed  the 
three  dams  that  had  been  constructed  in  the  night  and  allowed  the  gasoline  to  move 
further downstream.  

Work continued during the day, and the leading edge of the gasoline appeared to 
have been stopped about 15 miles from the rupture site, about 7 miles upstream of Lake 
Tawakoni.  The  lake  is  a  major  water  supply  for  Dallas  and  numerous  smaller 
communities.  After  the  accident,  the  chemical  MTBE  (methyl  tertiary  butyl  ether),  a 
component of the gasoline, was found in Lake Tawakoni.  

Preaccident Information 

The line pipe was 28 inches in diameter, with a wall thickness of 0.281 inch. The 
double  seam  submerged-arc  welded  pipe  had  been  manufactured  in  1970  by  the  Steel 
Company  of  Canada  to  conform  to  American  Petroleum  Institute  Specification  5LX, 

 

NTSB/PAB-01/03 
 

 

3 

Grade  X-52.  The  pipeline  had  been  constructed  in  1970.  The  soil  in  the  area  of  the 
rupture consisted of “gumbo” clay and limestone marl. Koppers Bitumastic pipe coating 
was applied during construction to this section of the line. 

An  in-line  inspection  tool  (“smart  pig”)  was  run  through  this  section  of  line  in 
1997. Anomalies meeting Explorer criteria were excavated, evaluated, and repaired. No 
anomalies meeting Explorer’s 1997 criteria were reported in the area of the March 2000 
failure during the in-line inspection, so the pipe was not visually examined at this location 
before the failure. 

Postaccident Examination of the Failed Pipe Segment 

Postaccident laboratory examination of the failed pipe segment showed that the 
rupture  area  had  a  typical  “fish-mouth  type”  crack;  when  one  looked  north  along  the 
pipeline, the crack was at about the 1 o’clock position on the pipe. The crack was about 
50 1/2 inches long, and its maximum width was about 6 3/4 inches. The ends of the crack 
were located off the edge of the longitudinal seam weld, and about the middle one-third 
of the crack was directly adjacent to the pipe’s longitudinal seam weld.  

The surface of the main fracture was examined. In the middle region, where the 
crack was located directly adjacent to the longitudinal seam weld, a portion of the fracture 
surface  appeared  relatively  smooth,  and  crack  arrest  marks  typical  of  fatigue  were 
observed.  Crack  arrest  lines  appeared  to  nearly  intersect  the  inner  edge  of  the  main 
fracture  surface,  but  the  fracture  plane  was  at  an  angle  of  about  45 degrees,  consistent 
with high-stress, low-cycle fatigue. In another region of the fracture surface adjacent to 
the outer edge, fracture features were obliterated by corrosion.  

The pipe coating in the rupture area appeared wrinkled and torn. The coating bore 
meandering cracks, ranging up to 2 1/2 inches wide, which exposed the pipeline surface. 
Corrosion pits were observed on the outer surface of the pipe in areas where the coating 
was cracked. The corrosion pitting was generally isolated, except in the area adjacent to 
the failure, where zones of continuous corrosion pitting were observed. Pitting was found 
on the longitudinal weld, and crack-like features were observed at the longitudinal weld 
boundary  in  some  of  the  pitted  areas.  The  crack-like  features  were  typical  of  a  weld 
defect, such as incomplete fusion. No crack-like features were observed in any pits not on 
the longitudinal weld. (Upon examination after the accident, Explorer noted that, during 
initial  construction  of  the  pipeline  section  surrounding  the  failure  site,  the  pipe  and 
coating may have been backfilled before the coating had cooled sufficiently. This could 
have caused extensive wrinkling in the coating, as well as pulling and tearing the coating 
materials.) 

 

NTSB/PAB-01/03 
 

 
Postaccident Activities 

4 

Before Explorer restarted the pipeline, it established a testing plan, which it gave 
the  U.S.  Department  of  Transportation’s  Research  and  Special  Programs 
to 
Administration (RSPA) for review and approval. The plan established repair procedures, 
required a pressure reduction to 20 percent below the calculated failure pressure of the 
pipe at the rupture location, set a refilling and startup procedure, and mandated a pipeline 
incident  review  that  addressed  controller  training  and  SCADA2  design  improvements, 
including  simulation  training.  Additional  in-line  testing  was  conducted,  and  several 
repairs  to  the  pipeline  were  made.  On  December 15,  2000,  RSPA  gave  Explorer 
permission to return pipeline operation to the operating pressures that had been in effect 
before the accident. 

Probable Cause 

The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of 
the  pipeline  failure  was  corrosion-fatigue  cracking  that  initiated  at  the  edge  of  the 
longitudinal  seam  weld  at  a  likely  pre-existing  weld  defect.  Contributing  to  the failure 
was the loss of pipe coating integrity. 

 

July 6, 2001 

                                                 

2  Pipeline  controllers  use  SCADA  (supervisory  control  and  data  acquisition)  systems  to  remotely 
monitor  and  control  movement  through  pipelines.  Using  a  SCADA  system,  controllers can monitor flow 
rates and pressures along the lines, control valves, and pumps to adjust the flow at pump stations and other 
locations throughout the pipeline system. 

 

NTSB/PAB-01/03 
 

