 

 

 
Pipeline Accident Number: 
Type of System: 
Accident Type: 
Location: 
 
Date and Time: 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Owner/Operator: 
Fatalities/Injuries: 
Damage/Clean Up Cost: 
Material Released: 
Quantity Released: 
Pipeline Pressure: 
 
Component Affected: 

 
 
 
 

 

 

National Transportation Safety Board 

Washington, D.C. 20594 

Pipeline Accident Brief 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DCA-00-MP-004 
Hazardous liquid  
Pipe failure and leak 
Winchester, Kentucky 
January 27, 2000, 12:12 p.m. central standard  
time (CST) 
Marathon Ashland Pipe Line LLC 
None 
$7.1 million 
Crude oil 
About 489,000 gallons 
606 pounds per square inch, gauge, (psig)  
at site of failure  
24-inch-diameter, API 5L, X-52, 0.250-inch-wall-
thickness, steel pipe 

 

The Accident 

About 12:12 p.m. CST1 on January 27, 2000, a Marathon Ashland Pipe Line LLC 
(Marathon Ashland) 24-inch-diameter pipeline that runs 265 miles between Owensboro 
and Catlettsburg, Kentucky, ruptured near Winchester, Kentucky. The ruptured pipeline 
released about 11,644 barrels (about 489,000 gallons) of crude oil onto a golf course and 
into  Twomile  Creek.  No  injuries  or  deaths  resulted  from  the  accident.  As  of 
December 13, 2000, Marathon Ashland had spent about $7.1 million in response to the 
accident. 

Preaccident Information 

The  pipe  was  0.250-inch-wall-thickness,  24-inch-diameter,  steel  pipe.  It  was 
constructed in 1973. In the area of the rupture, the pipeline ran through a layer of shale 
and  rested  on  cinderblock-size  pieces  of  Styrofoam.  These  Styrofoam  “pillows”  were 
installed to keep the pipe from lying directly on the shale. The pipeline had a maximum 
operating pressure of 780 psig. 

                                                 

1 All references to time in this report are CST. Although the Marathon Ashland operations center is in 

the eastern time zone (in Findley, Ohio), this pipeline originates in the CST zone. 

NTSB/PAB-01/02 

 

2 

In January 1997, a contractor’s magnetic flux standard resolution inline inspection 
tool was run through the entire pipeline. Excavations were then made at locations along 
the pipeline where the inspection tool indicated significant anomalies. At the site where 
the pipeline ruptured, the 1997 inspection data showed an anomaly that the contractor had 
interpreted as a “dent.” The pipeline had not been excavated at this location because the 
dent did not appear to meet the repair criteria being used at the time. The repair criteria 
used  required  that,  for  a  dent  to  be  repaired,  it  had  to  be  deeper  than  2 percent  of  the 
outside diameter of the pipe.  

Leak Reporting and Response 

During  the  morning  of  January  27,  2000,  the  pipeline  had  been  shut  down  for 
previously planned maintenance work at the Catlettsburg terminal. The shutdown of the 
line began at 6:59 a.m., and the line was out of operation until 11:12 a.m. At this time, a 
controller at the Marathon Ashland operations center in Findlay, Ohio, opened manifold 
valves  at  Owensboro  and  Catlettsburg  to  allow  the  pipeline  to  return  to  normal 
operations. 

At  11:14 a.m.,  the  controller  began  to  restart  the  pipeline.  About  11:30 a.m.,  a 
pipeline leak monitor (PLM) alarm sounded in the Findlay operations center and flashed 
on the supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) screen.2 This alarm indicated 
that  the  liquids  into  and  out  of  the  pipeline  were  not  in  balance.  After  the  controller 
focused  on  some  pressure  set  points  and  flow  rates  to  reestablish  balance,  he  resumed 
starting  additional  pumping  units  on  the  line.  About  11:52 a.m.,  the  SCADA  system 
flashed  “NORMAL”  on  the  screen,  indicating  that  the  alarm  had  cleared  and  the  flow 
rates were in balance. The controller continued to monitor pressures at stations along the 
line. At 12:00 noon, a PLM alarm again sounded, indicating that the parameters for the 2-
hour  and  4-hour  line  balance  were  still  showing  an  imbalance  on  the  system.  (The 
controller explained during a postaccident interview that he had expected the PLM alarms 
to  sound  during  the  startup  of  the  system,  so  he  was  not  surprised  by  the  alarms 
sounding.)  SCADA  records  show  that  the  pipeline  rupture  occurred  between  the 
Marathon Ashland Tates Creek and Preston Stations at approximately 12:12 p.m. A PLM 
alarm displayed almost immediately after the pipeline ruptured. 

About  12:37 p.m.,  the  controller,  uncomfortable  about  the  lower-than-expected 
pressures  at  pumping  stations  along  the  pipeline  and  a  lost  flow  rate  at  Catlettsburg, 
started  to  shut  the  system  down.  Additional  PLM  alarms,  showing  losses,  displayed  at 
12:45 and 12:54 p.m.  

                                                 

2 Pipeline controllers use the SCADA system to remotely monitor and control movement through pipelines. Using 
the SCADA system, controllers can monitor flow rates and pressures along the lines and control valves and pumps to 
adjust the flow at pump stations and other locations throughout the pipeline system.   

 

NTSB/PAB-01/02 

 

3 

About  1:00 p.m.,  the  controller  paged  the  operations  supervisor  and,  shortly 
afterwards,  the  supervisor  came  into  the Findlay operations center. After the controller 
and the supervisor had discussed the situation and reviewed the data, they called the area 
supervisor for this pipeline segment.  

The two supervisors discussed the situation and agreed that they should pressure 
up  the  pipeline  to  monitor  the  pressures.  The  downstream  valves  at  Catlettsburg  were 
closed  about  1:02 p.m.  About  1:28 p.m.,  a  single  pumping  unit  at  Owensboro,  the 
originating pump station, was started to put pressure on the pipeline. Pressures along the 
pipeline were observed and recorded. About 1:00, 1:38, 1:40, and 1:44 p.m., PLM alarms 
sounded  and  showed  on  the  SCADA  screen.  At  1:46 p.m.,  and  again  at  1:57 p.m.,  the 
pressures were recorded.  

About  2:00 p.m.,  the  controller  expressed  concern  to  the  operations  supervisor 
that they had put about 1,000 barrels of crude oil into the pipeline, but pressures were not 
rising  as  expected.  After  making  a  phone  call  to  the  area  supervisor,  the  operations 
supervisor told the controller to shut down the pipeline. The shutdown was accomplished 
about 2:05 p.m. 

Shortly  afterwards,  at  2:11  p.m.,  the  Winchester  Fire  Department  called  the 
pipeline  operations  center  in  Findlay,  Ohio,  to  report  the  odor  of  gas  in  the  air.  The 
operations  center  immediately  relayed  this  information  to  the  area  supervisor,  who 
dispatched  a  four-person  crew  to  close  the  two  manual  valves  nearest  the  leak  site. 
Marathon Ashland employees closed these manual valves at 3:30 p.m. 

About 2:20 p.m., a landowner downstream of the leak site telephoned the Findlay 
operations center to report oil flowing onto his property. The operations supervisor told 
the  controller  to  automatically  shut  the  mainline  block valves at the Preston and Tates 
Creek Stations. 

Postaccident Examination of the Failed Pipe 

The  rupture  was  found  on  the  bottom  of  the  pipe.  (See  figure 1.)  Postaccident 
laboratory examination of the pipe showed transgranular cracks that had the appearance 
typical of fatigue progression. The combined depth of the progressive cracks in the areas 
of maximum penetration was about 90 to 95 percent of the pipe wall thickness. 

 

NTSB/PAB-01/02 

 

4 

 
Figure 1. Photograph of ruptured pipe; arrow indicates rupture site 

Primary and secondary origin areas of fatigue cracking were found at the edges of 
a dent in the pipe wall. The dent was consistent with contact with a hard object, although 
no  hard  object  likely  to  have  caused  it  (such  as  a  rock)  was  found  during  the 
investigation. Numerous secondary cracks were in the vicinity of the two origin areas.  

Postaccident Developments 

After the accident, the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Research and Special 
Programs Administration issued a Corrective Action Order requiring Marathon Ashland 
“to take the necessary corrective action to protect the public and the environment from 
potential  hazards  associated  with  its  24-inch  pipeline.”  In  part,  these  actions  included: 
maintaining a 20-percent operating pressure reduction; conducting all analysis necessary 
to  determine  an  interim  maximum  operating  pressure;  developing  and  implementing  a 
work plan for the testing and repair or replacement of sections of pipe with significant 
defects; evaluating the effectiveness of full encirclement sleeves for repairing significant 
defects identified by a transverse flux inline inspection tool; and submitting a report of 
the  results  of  all  removal,  testing,  and  analysis  performed  under  the  work  plan  to  the 
regional  director  of 
ran 
slope/deformation  and  transverse  flux  inspection  tools  in  the  pipeline  and  reported  the 
findings to the Office of Pipeline Safety. (These tools are used to discover anomalies in 
the line, such as dents, corrosion, or cracking.) As a result of these internal inspections, 
anomalies meeting the repair criteria for the entire pipeline were reviewed, inspected, and 
repaired.  

the  Office  of  Pipeline  Safety.  Marathon  Ashland 

Postaccident Training 

Before  the  spill,  Marathon  Ashland  had  allocated  funds  for  and  ordered  (1)  a 
SCADA training simulator for its controllers and (2) a full-time training supervisor. The 
training supervisor began duties in March 2000. The simulator arrived on May 15, 2000, 

 

NTSB/PAB-01/02 

 

5 

and the first pipeline simulation model, of a Marathon Ashland 10-inch products system, 
was used to train 43 controllers. A second pipeline simulation, of a Marathon Ashland 
22-inch  crude  oil  system,  was  installed  on  October 6,  2000.  As  of  January  2001,  four 
controllers had completed training on this second simulation. Marathon Ashland intends 
the  simulator  training  to  help  its  controllers  recognize  and  react  to  problems  more 
effectively.  

Probable Cause 

The probable cause of the accident was fatigue cracking due to a dent in the pipe 
that,  in  combination  with  fluctuating  pressures  within  the  pipe,  produced  high  local 
stresses in the pipe wall. Contributing to the severity of the accident was the failure of the 
controller  and  supervisors to timely recognize the rupture, shut down the pipeline, and 
isolate the ruptured section of the pipeline. 

 

Approved: May 3, 2001 

 

NTSB/PAB-01/02 

