A L   T

 

N
O
I
T
A

N

 

R A SP

N
 

O

L U R IBUS UNUM  

E P

R

T

A

T

I

O
N

National Transportation Safety Board

Washington, D.C. 20594

S

A

FETY

 

 B O A R D

Accident No.:
Type of System:
Type of Accident:
Location:
Date and Time:
Owner/Operator:
Property Damage and Losses:
Fatalities:
Injuries:
Material Released:
Pressure:
Type of Failure:
Component Affected:

The Accident

Pipeline Accident Brief

DCA-99-MP-004
Natural gas service line
Rupture, explosion, and fire
Bridgeport, Alabama
January 22, 1999, 10:02 a.m. CST
Utilities Board of the City of Bridgeport
$1.4 million
3
6
Natural gas
35 psig
Excavation damage
¾-inch steel gas service line

On January 22, 1999, while digging a trench behind a building  at  406  Alabama
Avenue, a backhoe operator damaged a ¾-inch steel natural gas service line and a 1-inch
water service line.  This resulted in two leaks in the natural gas service line, which was
operated  at  35  psig.    One  leak  occurred  where  the  backhoe  bucket  had  contacted  and
pulled the natural gas service line.  (See figure 1.)  The other was a physical separation of
the  gas  service  line  at  an  underground  joint  near  the  meter,  which  was  close  to  the
building.  Gas migrated into the building at 406 Alabama Avenue, where it ignited about
10:02  a.m.    An  explosion  followed,  destroying  three  buildings:    404,  406,  and
408 Alabama  Avenue  (see  figure  2).    Other  buildings  within  a  two-block  area  of  the
explosion sustained significant damage.  Three fatalities, five serious injuries,1 and  one
minor injury resulted from this accident.

                                                

1  According  to  the  Jackson  County  Coroner,  on  March  23,  2000,  14  months  and  1  day  after  the
accident,  one  of  the  seriously  injured  persons  died  as  a  result  of  injuries  sustained  in  the  explosion.    In
accordance  with  49  Code  of  Federal  Regulations  (CFR)  830.2,  his  injuries  continue  to  be  classified  as
“serious” for reporting purposes.  Title 49 CFR 830.2 defines fatal injury as “any injury which results in
death within 30 days of the accident.”

NTSB/PAB-00/01

2

Figure  1.  Damaged  section  of  the  gas  service  line  to  406  Alabama  Avenue.
(Arrow shows leak location. Note how the bowed area corresponds with the width of a
backhoe bucket.)

Figure 2. Damage to 404, 406, and 408 Alabama Avenue

NTSB/PAB-00/01

Preaccident Events

3

The owner of R&B Construction (R&B) told investigators that the owner of 408
Alabama  Avenue  had  hired  R&B  to  dig  a  trench  from  an  electric  pole  behind  404
Alabama Avenue to his building for an underground electric service cable.  (See figure 3.)
The owner of R&B told investigators that he had not planned beforehand to dig the trench
to  408  Alabama  Avenue  on  the  morning  of  the  accident  and  that  he  did  not  call  the
Alabama  Line  Location  Center,  Inc.2    However,  when  a  part-time  employee,  who  had
operated a backhoe for R&B in the past, arrived at the R&B office the morning of January
22 looking for work, the owner of R&B decided to have the employee dig the trench that
day.

Figure 3. Schematic of accident area

The owner of R&B was a full-time employee of the Utilities Board of the City of
Bridgeport  (Utilities  Board)  at  the  time  of  the  accident.3    He  and  a  Utilities  Board
coworker,  who  was  the  acting  supervisor  of  the  Utilities  Board  field  personnel  on  the
morning  of  the  accident,  told  Safety  Board  investigators  that  on  the  way  to  work  that
morning,  they  located  and  marked  the  gas  and  water  service  lines  for  the  trenching

                                                

2 Since the accident, the Alabama Line Location Center has been redesignated Alabama One Call.
3 The Utilities Board owns and operates Bridgeport’s water and natural gas distribution systems.

NTSB/PAB-00/01

4

activity.    The  owner  of  R&B  told  investigators  that  blue  paint  was  used  to  mark  both
service lines because that was the only paint that they had.4  Upon their arrival the day
after  the  explosion,  Safety  Board  investigators  could  not  find  any  blue  or  other  line
markings on the ground at the accident scene. Representatives from the Alabama Public
Service  Commission  and  the  Alabama  State  Fire  Marshals  Office  also  did  not  observe
any markings on the ground when they arrived at the accident scene within hours of the
explosion.

The  owner  of  R&B  and  the  acting  supervisor  left  the  excavation  site  about
8:15 a.m. to go to the Utilities Board shop.  They told investigators that, before they left,
they had asked the owner of 408 Alabama Avenue to watch the backhoe operator.  The
R&B backhoe operator arrived at the excavation  site  some  time  after  8:15  a.m.    While
digging the trench, the backhoe operator damaged the underground gas and water service
lines to 406 Alabama Avenue, resulting in leaks in the water and gas service lines.  About
9:15  a.m.,  the  owner  of  408  Alabama  Avenue  went  to  the  Utilities  Board  office  at
513 Alabama  Avenue  and  reported  the  excavation  damage.    He  then  returned  to  the
excavation  site.    The  General  Manager  of  the  Utilities  Board  said  the  owner  of
408 Alabama  Avenue  reported  that  the  water  line  and  possibly  the  gas  line  were
damaged.

The Utilities Board paged its field personnel between 9:18 and 9:22 a.m.  Shortly
afterward,  five  Utilities  Board  employees  responded  to  the  excavation  site  from  three
locations to locate and repair the leaks.  One of the Utilities Board employees told Safety
Board investigators that upon his arrival at the accident scene, the R&B backhoe operator
showed him where he had wrapped black tape over the leak in the gas service line.  In
addition, he and other Utilities Board employees noticed that water was running on the
ground.  They could hear the hissing of leaking gas and smell a strong natural gas odor in
the general area.

The Utilities Board employee who was the acting supervisor turned the water off
so that field personnel could excavate and locate the leak.  The acting supervisor could
see a portion of the pulled gas service line above ground and said that he suspected that
the gas service line was severed at some point. Though the acting supervisor could hear
the gas blowing and see the gas bubbling from the water in the excavated ditch, he did not
know  the  direction  in  which  the  gas  was  blowing.    He  told  investigators  that  he  “was
hoping” that the line was pulled off at the main and that the gas was blowing up into the
air.    He  added  that  he  believed  the  leak  was  routine  and  the  situation  was  safe.    The
Utilities Board employees did not check for gas migrating underground or accumulating
in buildings and did not stop the flow of gas.  After the acting supervisor turned off the
water,  a  Utilities  Board  employee  started  digging  to  remove  water  and  soil  from  the
trench with a backhoe.  By this time, the owner of R&B, because he was a Utilities Board
employee and was paged, had arrived at the excavation site.
                                                

4 The Superintendent of the Utilities Board told Safety Board investigators that the Utilities Board uses

yellow paint to mark gas lines and blue paint to mark water lines.

NTSB/PAB-00/01

5

Shortly after the Utilities Board backhoe operator started digging, the building at
406 Alabama Avenue exploded.  The owner of 408 Alabama Avenue, the R&B backhoe
operator,  and  a  Utilities  Board  employee  received  fatal  injuries.    Five  other  people,
including a bystander, received serious injuries, and one person received a minor injury.

The  Alabama  State  Fire  Marshals  Office  determined  that  the  likely  source  of
ignition for the accumulated natural gas was a gas-fired heater at 406 Alabama Avenue,
which  had  an  active  pilot  light  at  the  time  of  explosion.5    The  Superintendent  of  the
Utilities Board estimated that within 5  to  10  minutes  after  the  explosion  he  had  closed
two valves on the 4-inch natural gas main feeding the natural gas to the broken service
line.

R&B Construction

R&B is a small construction company that employs part-time employees.  At the
time of the accident, it did not have employee qualification and training records or written
procedures for excavating near underground utility lines.

Recognizing that damages to underground facilities are usually  preventable,  and
most frequently occur due to a breakdown in the damage prevention process, Government
and  industry  have  been  working  to  identify  and  validate  existing  best  practices  for
preventing  damage  to  underground  facilities.    The  resulting  Common  Ground  study  of
one-call  systems  and  damage  prevention  best  practices6  discusses,  among  other  best
practices, the need to “call before you dig.”  The study recommends, “Unless otherwise
specified in state law, the  excavator  calls  the  one-call  center  at  least  two  working  days
and no more than ten working days prior to beginning excavation.”7  It also recommends
that an excavator observe a “tolerance zone” that includes the width of the facility plus 18
inches on either side and asks that excavators exercise reasonable care when excavating
within the tolerance zone to protect the underground facilities.

                                                

5 Although the  gas  line  had  separated  underground,  the  compacted  earth  surrounding  the  line  would

have provided a path that allowed continued gas flow sufficient to have fueled the pilot light.

6  Common  Ground:  Study  of  One-Call  Systems  and  Damage  Prevention  Best  Practices,  U.S.
Department of Transportation, Research and Special  Programs  Administration,  Office  of  Pipeline  Safety,
Washington, D.C., August 1999.  The Common Ground study, as authorized by the Transportation Equity
Act for the 21st Century (TEA 21), was prepared by more than 160 individuals representing a wide range of
interests,  organizations,  and  viewpoints  on  preventing  damage  to  underground  utilities.    A  nonprofit
organization, the Common Ground Alliance, has been formed to implement the best practices discussed in
the Common Ground study.

7 Alabama State law is similar to this recommendation.

NTSB/PAB-00/01

6

Bridgeport Utilities Board Procedures for Responding to
Pipeline Emergencies

The  Utilities  Board’s  written  emergency  procedures  in  effect  at  the  time  of  the
January  22,  1999,  accident  instruct  service  personnel  to  “…evaluate  the  extent  of  the
emergency,  request  assistance  as  needed,  and  inform  the  manager  if  necessary.”    The
procedures further direct service personnel to:

Evacuate  and  secure  the  area  if  necessary.  Actions  should  be  directed
towards protecting people first and then property.

…If, in the opinion of the person in charge, the emergency is so severe that
immediate shutdown is imperative, he may do so without clearance from
the Manager.

However,  the  procedures  do  not  instruct  employees  responding  to  a  reported  leak  to
consider the possibility of multiple leaks, check for gas accumulation in nearby buildings,
and, if necessary, to take steps to promptly stop the flow of gas.

During its annual inspections of the Utilities Board, the Alabama Public Service
Commission  did  not  identify  any  deficiencies  in  the  Utility  Board’s  emergency
procedures.    Since  the  accident,  the  emergency  procedures  have  been  changed  only  to
update the names, addresses, and phone numbers of contact persons and employees.

Probable Cause

The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of
the accident was the failure of R&B Construction to establish and follow safe procedures
for excavation activities, resulting in damage to a ¾-inch natural gas service line, and the
failure of the Utilities Board of the City of Bridgeport to provide appropriate emergency
response to the resulting natural gas leak.

Adopted: November 28, 2000

NTSB/PAB-00/01

