R A SP

N
 

O

E P L U RIBUS UNUM 

R

T

A

T

I

O
N

NAL  T

 

O
I
T
A
N

 

S

AFETY

 

 

 B O A R D

National Transportation Safety Board 

Washington, D.C. 20594 

Pipeline Accident Brief 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Accident No.:   
Type of System: 
Accident Type: 
 
Location: 
 
Date: 
Time:  
 
Owner/Operator: 
 
Fatalities: 
Injuries: 
 
Property Damage and Losses:  
 
Material Released: 
 
 
Pipeline Pressure: 
 
Component Affected:   
 

 
 

 
 

DCA-06-MP-001 
Natural gas distribution 
Pipeline break, explosion, and fire 
Bergenfield, New Jersey 
December 13, 2005 
9:26 a.m. eastern standard time1 
Public Service Electric and Gas Company 
3 
5 
$863,300 
Natural gas 
11 1/2 pounds per square inch, gauge  
1 1/4-inch steel service line 

The Accident 

On  December  13,  2005,  at  9:26  a.m.,  an  apartment  building  exploded  in  Bergenfield, 
New Jersey, after natural gas migrated into the building from a damaged pipeline. Investigators 
found a break in an underground 1 1/4-inch steel natural gas distribution service line that was 
operating  at  11  1/2  pounds  per  square  inch,  gauge.  The  break  occurred  at  an  underground 
threaded tee connection downstream from where excavators were removing an oil tank that was 
buried  under  the  asphalt  parking  lot  adjacent  to  the  building.  The  break  occurred,  under  the 
parking  lot,  about  7  feet  4  inches  from  the  building’s  wall.  Three  residents  of  the  apartment 
building were killed. Four residents and a tank removal worker were injured and transported to 
hospitals. The property damage consisted of the apartment building, which was a complete loss. 
(See  figure  1.) According  to  Bergen  County  tax  records,  the  assessed  value  of  the  apartment 
building was $863,300. 

JP  Management,  a  real  estate  company  that  owned  the  apartment  building,  hired  the 
American Tank Service Company (American Tank) to remove and replace the buried oil tank. 
On  December  5,  2005,  American  Tank  requested  markouts2  of  the  utilities  at  30  Elm  Street 
through the New Jersey One Call System.3 On December 7, 2005, a Public Service Electric and 
                                                 

1 All times are eastern standard time. 
2 A markout is a ground marking that is typically color coded and that indicates the location of underground 

utilities. 

3 New Jersey One Call is a one-call operation for anyone planning to dig (excavation, demolition, blasting), 

regardless of the size of the project. This operation is for both commercial construction and homeowners. 

1

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

Gas Company (PSE&G)4 street inspector went to the site and marked the location of the buried 
gas service line to the building. The marked location showed that the service line ran under the 
parking lot and about parallel to the building’s wall. At a point downstream of the excavation 
area, the pipeline turned 90o toward the building. (See figure 2.) 

 

Figure 1. Damage caused by explosion. 

About 8:30 a.m. on Monday, December 12, the American Tank crew arrived at the site, 
saw the gas and water utility markouts, and began excavating in the asphalt parking lot that was 
adjacent to the building. The work contract indicated that the tank capacity was 2,000 gallons. 
According to the American Tank foreman, when the excavation was about 30 inches deep, the 
top of the tank was exposed. At this time, the crew realized that the tank was a 5,000-gallon tank 
rather  than  a  2,000-gallon  tank.5  Because  the  larger  tank  was  wider,  longer,  and  heavier  than 
expected, and thus closer to the natural gas service line, the excavation crew had concerns about 
its  safe  removal.  In  an  interview,  one  of  the  crewmembers  stated,  “[At  the  time]  I  said  our 
concern is once we move the tank or roll it over, to roll it and take it out, it may undermine the 
gas line.” An American Tank vice president went to the site to verify that it was a larger tank and 
to reassess its removal. He arranged for his office staff to call New Jersey One Call for a second 
markout of the utilities. The PSE&G inspector arrived at the apartment building about 11:14 a.m. 
and re-marked the gas service line. He made a slight change to the original marking where the 
gas line entered the building. 
                                                 
oldest and largest publicly owned utility. 

4 PSE&G is one of the largest combined electric and gas companies in the United States and is New Jersey’s 

5  Based  on  the  length  and  depth  of  the  tank,  an  American  Tank  vacuum  truck  operator  referred  to  the  tank 
capacity reference books that he carried in his truck and correctly determined the capacity of the tank to be 5,000 
gallons. 

2

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

Figure 2. Diagram of accident site. 

 

3

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

The American Tank foreman told investigators that on December 12 he asked the PSE&G 
inspector  whether  the  gas  line  could  be  shut  off  while  they  excavated.  This  request  was  a 
precaution to prevent the release of gas if the line was damaged during the tank removal. The 
PSE&G inspector told investigators he stated to the American Tank foreman that because it was 
wintertime the gas could not be shut off. However, the PSE&G inspector said that he would ask 
his  supervisor.  When  the  supervisor  told  the  inspector  that  turning  off  the  natural  gas  to  the 
building would not be possible, the inspector informed the American Tank foreman. According to 
the  PSE&G,  shutting  off  the  gas  to  the  building  without  making  prior  arrangements  with  the 
PSE&G and the building’s owner would have created a health risk to the residents by leaving 
them without gas for heat, hot water, and cooking. 

The American Tank foreman and assistant manager said during postaccident interviews 
that,  based  on  their  examination  of  the  worksite  after  the  initial  excavation,  they  thought  the 
excavation was stable and secure, and the excavation wall was far enough from the pipe to be 
safe. However, the American Tank crew did not evaluate the soil at the walls of the ditch for 
stability.6  

The  excavation  crew  exposed  a  portion  of  the  gas  pipeline  by  excavating  with  hand 
shovels  to  confirm  the  service  line’s  location.  The  excavation  was  done  by  digging  into  the 
eastern  trench  wall,  near  the  gas  pipeline  and  the  building,  while  standing  in  the  trench.  The 
PSE&G street inspector who had marked the pipeline told Safety Board investigators that he was 
on site when the service line was first uncovered. The service line was partially exposed in two 
locations that were each about 1 foot long. The service line was buried about 30 to 36 inches and 
was about 2 feet from the extended eastern edge of the trench. To excavate the 5,000-gallon tank, 
the crew had to open a trench that was about 24 feet long, which was considerably larger than 
originally planned.  

The PSE&G inspector determined that the pipeline was a PSE&G gas pipeline and that it 
was  accurately  marked.  According  to  the  inspector,  he  reminded  the  American  Tank 
crewmembers  of  their  obligation  to  protect  the  gas  pipe  from  damage  by  supporting  the  pipe 
against an immovable object, such as the building, or shoring the trench. The PSE&G inspector 
did not remain on the job to ensure that the pipeline was adequately protected. In addition, he did 
not attempt to test the curb valve to ensure it could be rapidly closed if the pipeline was broken. 
The  inspector  gave  the American Tank  foreman his  business  card  and  asked  him  to  call  if  he 
needed assistance or had any questions. The inspector departed the site at 11:47 a.m. According 
to the American Tank foreman, the trench was not shored and was about 4 to 5 feet deep at the 
end of the first day.  

The American Tank  crew  (assistant  manager,  foreman,  and  two  crewmembers)  arrived 
about  8:30  a.m.  on  Tuesday,  December  13,  2005,  to  continue  work  on  the  excavation.  The 
American Tank crewmembers told Safety Board investigators that they did not start any of the 
excavation equipment or expand the excavation on December 13, the day of the accident. When 
they  first  arrived,  they  saw  that  the  ground  surrounding  the  pipeline  had  collapsed  and  fallen 
from  underneath  portions  of  the  asphalt  parking  lot  along  the  eastern  wall  of  the  trench. The 
                                                 
6  Trench  wall  soils  can  be  tested  for  stability  by  using  a  penetrometer,  which  is  a  mechanical  device  that 
measures the force needed for a probe to enter the soil. Another method is the “thumb test,” in which the thumb is 
pushed into the soil along the wall. 

4

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

crewmembers said that they tied one end of a rope to the gas pipeline and the other end to the oil 
tank vent pipe at the building wall in an effort to help support the pipeline. The American Tank 
crew  also  placed  a  pump  into  the  trench  and  was  removing  some  of  the  water  that  had 
accumulated  when  some  crewmembers  reported  hearing  a  “popping”  sound  and  two 
crewmembers  smelled  natural  gas.  Shortly  afterward,  the  other  two  crewmembers  smelled 
natural gas.  

From across the street, a local business owner saw the American Tank crew working at 30 
Elm Street. He said that he saw water flowing down the road and when he went across the street 
to where the American Tank crew was working, he smelled natural gas. The business owner said 
that he would call the police for them. He called the Bergenfield Police Department7 at 8:49 a.m. 
and  reported  a  gas  leak.  His  call  was  the  only  one  that  the  Bergenfield  Police  Department 
received about the incident before the explosion. An apartment resident later told Safety Board 
investigators that she also had smelled natural gas, but had not called the police department, the 
fire department, or the PSE&G. The American Tank foreman called the PSE&G at 8:54 a.m. and 
reported that the ground had collapsed and the service line was broken. 

According  to  the  Bergenfield  Police  Department  dispatch  logs,  at  8:52  a.m.,  the 
Bergenfield Fire Department’s chief,8 a fire official,9 and an engine company responded to an 
initial notification of a gas leak. Two Bergenfield Police Department police officers were also 
dispatched. A  Bergenfield  police  officer  directed traffic  away  from  the  area. After  arriving  on 
scene about 8:54 a.m., the fire chief asked the police dispatchers to notify the PSE&G. At 8:58 
a.m.,  police  dispatchers  notified  the  PSE&G  of  the  incident. The  fire  chief  told  Safety  Board 
investigators that he had not observed any signs of a leak at the trench (that is, smelling gas, 
hearing a “hissing” sound, or seeing bubbling of water in the trench). The fire official said that he 
did  not  smell  gas  at  the  scene.  No  one  from  the  Bergenfield  Fire  Department  checked  the 
apartment  building  for  the  presence  of  natural  gas.  The  fire  department  did  not  attempt  to 
evacuate the building before the explosion. 

The Bergenfield fire chief said that the American Tank crew warned him, before the 
explosion, about the soil giving way in the trench and to be careful while walking near the 
trench. The  fire  chief  also  said  that  he  looked  into  the  trench  and  could  see  that  the  soil 
beneath the asphalt on the east side of the trench had fallen into the trench.  

About 9:22 a.m., a PSE&G service technician arrived on scene. The technician attempted 
to close the curb valve to shut off the gas, but he was unable to apply enough force to close it. In 
a  postaccident  interview,  the  service  technician  said  that  as  he  approached  the  building  to 
investigate  the  gas  leak,  an American  Tank  crewmember  told  him  to  not  get  too  close  to  the 
trench because it had already collapsed. The service technician said that he had seen a piece of 
asphalt  that  had  fallen  into  the  trench.  The  service  technician,  using  a  portable  gas  detector, 

                                                 

7 The Bergenfield Police Department dispatches the police department and the fire department. 
8 The Bergenfield Fire Department was composed mostly of volunteers. The fire chief, a volunteer, served for a 

1-year term. 

9  Bergenfield  had  five  career  fire  officials  who  conducted  site  inspections  and  fire  investigations.  The  fire 

officials also responded to fire incidents. 

5

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

detected a positive gas reading just inside the boiler room doorway of the apartment building. He 
started moving away from the building as it exploded at 9:26 a.m. 

The police and fire departments, American Tank, and the PSE&G started rescue actions. 
The fire departments started firefighting. About 10:00 a.m., a PSE&G street crew was able to 
shut off the gas to the service line by closing the curb valve. 

Inspection and Recovery of Pipeline 

When the pipeline was later uncovered during the postaccident excavation, a frayed rope 
was found attached to the gas pipeline. Additionally, a broken piece of “two-by-four” lumber was 
found near the gas pipeline.  

During  pressure  tests  on  the  steel  service  line,  the  only  leak  was  found  at  the  iron 
threaded tee connection that was about 7 feet 4 1/2 inches from the building wall. The tee had 
separated from the service line and had a gap of about 3 inches. (See figure 3.) The tee and the 
separated  end  of  the  service  line  were  removed  and  sent  to  the  Safety  Board’s  Materials 
Laboratory for analysis.  

Figure 3. Separation of steel service line. 

 

The threaded end of the service line fractured at the connection. The exposed threads on 
either  side  of  the  mating  surfaces  showed  no  evidence  of  corrosion  degradation  or  fatigue 
cracking. Microscopic examination of the fracture revealed features consistent with an overstress 
separation. The evidence is consistent with the pipeline separating in overstress after the ground 
collapsed into the trench and caused the pipeline to move. 

 

6

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

American Tank’s Procedures and Training 

American  Tank’s  written  procedures  covered  certifications  and  licensing,  obtaining 
contracts,  the  steps  from  signed  contract  to  job  execution,  and  the  steps  for  job  completion. 
American Tank’s written procedures for excavation work were limited to using the New Jersey 
One Call System for marking buried utilities, including gas pipelines. The company did not have 
written operating procedures for the protection of utilities while excavating.  

According  to  American  Tank,  its  unwritten  procedures  for  the  protection  of  utilities 

included the following: 

•  Visit the job site to survey for hazards and logistical issues. 

•  Obtain all needed permits. 

•  Survey the job site to ensure markings are in place. 

•  Uncover the top of the tank to determine its direction and hand excavation of nearby 

utilities. 

•  Evaluate the nature of the soil to determine the possibility of collapse. 

•  Contact the utility company and request shutoff. 

•  Protect and support the utility; contact the utility company if damaged.  

• 

If  damage  to  the  utility  is  observed,  call  the  emergency  telephone  numbers  for  the 
utility and call 911 or fire and police department emergency telephone numbers.  

American Tank had no formal training program on the protection and support of utilities.  

PSE&G’s  Excavation  Damage  Prevention  Program  and  Emergency 
Plan 

The  PSE&G  participated  in  the  New  Jersey  One  Call  system.  It  also  participated  in 
various  damage  prevention  and  awareness  activities  in  2005.  These  activities  included 
distributing  damage  prevention  materials  to  home  improvement  stores,  contractors,  equipment 
rental companies, retail stores, and municipalities. The PSE&G does not use direct mailing to 
contractors unless damage has been reported. Then, the PSE&G sends information letters about 
New  Jersey’s  damage  prevention  laws  to  contractors  who  have  damaged  their  company’s 
underground facilities.  

The  PSE&G  has  an  emergency  plan  that  was  developed  in  accordance  with  State  and 
Federal regulations. However, the PSE&G emergency plan does not have a provision requiring 
the testing of curb valves to determine whether the valves can be quickly operated to shut down a 
service line when excavation activities place the line at risk. 

7

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

Regulations, Standards, and Oversight 

There are a number of applicable regulations and standards regarding excavation safety. 
These  include  regulations  and  standards  from  the  State  of  New  Jersey,  the  U.S.  Occupational 
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), the U.S. Department of Transportation, and industry 
standards and best practices. 

New Jersey Board of Public Utilities  

The  New  Jersey  Board  of  Public  Utilities  publishes  a  handbook  that  explains  the 
requirements of the New Jersey One Call law for excavators. Excavators are required to notify 
New Jersey One Call from 3 to 10 days before excavating and to immediately report any damage 
to the operator of the facility. Furthermore, the New Jersey Underground Facility Protection Act, 
section N.J.S.A. 48:2-82 d(2 and 3) requires excavators to “plan the excavation or demolition to 
avoid  damage  to  and  to  minimize  interference  with  underground  facilities”  and  “to  use 
reasonable  care  during  excavation  or  demolition  to  avoid  damage  to  or  interference  with 
underground facilities.”  

The Board of Public Utilities is charged with overseeing and enforcing compliance with 
the  New  Jersey  Underground  Facility  Protection  Act  and  the  New  Jersey  One  Call  law.  The 
Board  of  Public  Utilities  also  has  delegated  authority  to  enforce  Federal  natural  gas  pipeline 
safety standards in 49 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 192.  

On  November  28,  2006,  the  New  Jersey  Board  of  Public  Utilities  sent  Notices  of 
Probable Violation to American Tank and the PSE&G. American Tank was cited for a probable 
violation of the New Jersey Underground Facility Protection Act for not planning the excavation 
to  avoid  damage  and  minimize  interference  with  an  underground  facility  and  not  using 
reasonable care in an excavation.  

The Board of Public Utilities cited the PSE&G for three probable violations of 49 CFR 
Part 192. The first probable violation was that the PSE&G employee, after being notified of a 
potential hazard, left the site with the potential hazard remaining. The second probable violation 
was that the PSE&G’s response did not facilitate the most effective course of action under the 
circumstances following the notice of a reported gas leak and ruptured service on December 13, 
2005. The third probable violation was that the PSE&G did not have sufficient communication 
and  exchange  of  information  with  the  Bergenfield  fire  officials  regarding  its  gas  emergency 
programs.  The  outcome  of  the  citations  to American  Tank  and  the  PSE&G  is  pending  as  of 
May 1, 2007. 

U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

OSHA  investigated  this  accident.  Title  29  CFR  1926.651  establishes  excavation 
requirements  designed  to  safeguard  employees  and  prevent  damage  to  underground  utilities, 
including a requirement to establish the location of underground installations before excavating.  

8

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

OSHA  and American Tank  reached  a  stipulated  agreement  for  two  violations  in  which 
American Tank was fined for its conduct during this accident. American Tank was cited for the 
failure to use safe and acceptable means to exactly locate the underground vent pipe for the oil 
storage tank and for the failure to safeguard employees while the excavation was open.  

Federal Pipeline Safety Requirements 

The  Pipeline  and  Hazardous  Materials  Safety  Administration’s  (PHMSA’s)  pipeline 
safety  regulations  require  that  each  operator  of  a  buried  natural  gas  pipeline  must  carry  out  a 
written program to prevent damage to the pipeline from excavation activities. Specifically, in 49 
CFR  192.614(c),  the  damage  prevention  program  must  provide  for  the  inspection  of  those 
pipelines  that  an  operator  “has  reason  to  believe”  could  be  damaged  by  excavation  activities. 
These  inspections  must  be  done  as  “frequently  as  necessary”  during  and  after  the  excavation 
activities to verify the integrity of the pipeline. 

Title 49 CFR 192.615(a) requires that each natural gas pipeline operator have a written 
emergency plan that establishes procedures for minimizing the hazards resulting from a natural 
gas  pipeline  emergency.  The  emergency  plan  must  address  several  emergency  responses, 
including  emergency  shutdown  and  pressure  reduction  in  any  section  of  the  pipeline  system 
necessary  to  minimize  hazards  to  life  or  property  and  elimination  of  any  actual  or  potential 
hazard to life or property. 

Industry Guidance 

The  Gas  Piping  Technology  Committee10  (GPTC)  publishes  the  Guide  for  Gas 
Transmission  and  Distribution  Piping  Systems  to  help  natural  gas  operators  ensure  regulatory 
compliance.  The  section  of  the  GPTC  guide  referring  to  Section  192.614c(6)  states  the 
following:  

Where required, the inspection may include periodic or full-time surveillance and 
may include leakage surveys during and after construction. The operator should 
consider  maintaining  field  contact  with  the  excavator  during  the  excavation 
activities to avoid potential problems. 

The section of the GPTC guide referring to Section 192.615(a) states, “The objective of 
the (emergency) plan should be to ensure that personnel who could be involved in an emergency 
are prepared to recognize and deal with the situation in an expeditious and safe manner.” 

The  Common  Ground  Alliance  Best  Practices11  manual,  version  3.0,  states  that  the 
excavator  must  use  reasonable  care  to  avoid  damaging  underground  facilities. The  excavator 
                                                 
from industry, government, and the public. 

10 The GPTC is an American National Standards Institute technical committee composed of technical specialists 

11 The Common Ground Alliance, composed of technical specialists from industry, government, and the public, 
provides a guide on underground utility damage prevention best practices and promotes their use throughout the 
United States. 

9

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

should  plan  the  excavation  to  avoid  damage  or  minimize  interference  with  the  underground 
facilities  in  or  near  the  work  area.  The  manual  also  states  that  the  protection  of  exposed 
underground facilities is as important as preventing damage to the facility when digging around 
the utility. Section 5-22 of the manual indicates that excavators are to support or brace exposed 
underground facilities and protect them from moving or shifting, which could result in damage to 
the  facility.  Methods  to  support,  brace,  and  protect  these  facilities  include  shoring  the  facility 
from below or providing a timber support with hangers across the top of the excavation to ensure 
that the facility does not move or bend. 

Excess Flow Valves 

Excess flow valves are designed to respond to an excessive flow of gas by automatically 
closing and restricting the gas flow, thereby reducing the likelihood of an explosion and fire. The 
valves are typically installed at the connection of a service line to a main pipeline. The valves 
can greatly reduce the consequences of service line breaks. The investigation examined whether 
an  excess  flow  valve  that  was  compatible  with  the  operating  conditions  for  the  apartment 
building would have been effective. Had the break in the service line been exposed to the open 
atmosphere, an excess flow valve would have activated immediately to restrict the flow of gas; 
however,  in  this  accident,  the  broken  section  of  pipe  was  underground  and  under  asphalt 
pavement. 

A leakage test conducted 2 days after the accident resulted in a flow rate of natural gas 
through  the  broken  service  line  of  about  1,600  standard  cubic  feet  per  hour. The  leakage  test 
could not be conducted until the excavation site was stabilized.12 Soil conditions at the time of 
the  leakage  test  were  significantly  different  than  at  the  time  the  service  line  was  broken;  this 
difference likely affected the flow rate measured during the test. Further, the flow rate of natural 
gas to the apartment building at the time the service line was fractured cannot be determined.13 
At  the  time  of  the  accident,  it  was  quite  cold;  the  temperature  was  about  18°  F.  It  would  be 
reasonable to assume that the heating system and the replenishment of hot water for the tenants 
would  have  been  operating  near  maximum  capacity.  However,  given  the  uncertainty  in  the 
leakage test results and the unknown flow rate to the building, the Safety Board was not able to 
determine whether an excess flow valve, had one been installed, would have activated after the 
service line was broken in this accident. 

Bergenfield Fire Department Procedures and Training 

According  to  the  fire  chief,  the  Bergenfield  Fire  Department  did  not  have  written 
procedures  for  natural  gas  incidents.  Safety  Board  investigators  were  told  in  Fire  Department 

                                                 
12  During  the  firefighting  operations,  significant  amounts  of  water  had  been  used  in  the  area.  The  trench 
adjacent to the broken section of pipe had been filled as a precautionary measure due to concerns that the building 
wall might collapse. Later, the trench was partially excavated then refilled because of unstable soil. Trench boxes 
were necessary to stabilize the excavation before the investigators could access the site.  

13 The flow rate to the building could not exceed 2,500 standard cubic feet per hour because of the capacity of 

the metering equipment. 

10

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

interviews that the Bergenfield Fire Department relied heavily on the assistance of the PSE&G in 
deciding whether to evacuate a structure. 

Effective  July  5,  2005,  the  State  of  New  Jersey  improved  its  written  course  material 
regarding natural gas hazards for Firefighter I training. The new material is in the Firefighter’s 
Handbook:  Essentials  of  Firefighting  and  Emergency  Response—New  Jersey  Edition,  and 
Addendum. In this handbook, Section D, Chapter II, “Recognizing and Avoiding the Hazards of 
Natural  Gas  and  Carbon  Monoxide,”  describes  the  properties  of  natural  gas,  the  natural  gas 
delivery  system,  natural  gas  detection,  and  the  response  to  natural  gas  emergencies.  In  the 
section, “Secure the Site,” the manual has the following recommendation:  

When the presence of gas is strong, the best rule is to evacuate people from the 
dwelling  and  move  them  across  the  street  or  a  distance  far  away  that  would 
prevent injuries if the structure were to explode.  

The  video  Natural  Gas:  Recognizing  and  Avoiding  the  Hazards,  which  was  produced 
with the cooperation of several companies and government agencies in New Jersey, including the 
PSE&G, is also included as part of the Firefighter I course. 

As a result of a July 1999 accident in Fairlawn, New Jersey, and a March 2006 agreement 
with the Board of Public Utilities, the PSE&G agreed to expand its emergency response training, 
which  is  coordinated  with  the  Bergen  County  Fire  Academy.  As  a  result  of  the  Bergenfield 
accident and a March 2006 agreement between the Board of Public Utilities and the PSE&G, the 
Board  of  Public  Utilities  obtained  permission  to  distribute  a  PSE&G-produced  video  for 
firefighters and first responders in the State of New Jersey. This video includes information on 
how to handle gas leak emergencies, and when to check the building, and when to evacuate. 

In October 2006, the PSE&G mailed a computer disk containing electric and gas hazard 
awareness  information  to  police  departments,  fire  departments,  and  emergency  management 
officials within the PSE&G’s service area to help them to develop standard operating procedures 
for electrical and gas emergencies. 

Probable Cause 

The  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  determines  that  the  probable  cause  of  the 
December 13, 2005, natural gas explosion and fire in Bergenfield, New Jersey, was the failure of 
the American  Tank  Service  Company  to  adequately  protect  the  natural  gas  service  line  from 
shifting soil during excavation, which resulted in damage to the service line and the release and 
migration of natural gas into the apartment building. Contributing to the accident was the failure 
of the Public Service Electric and Gas Company to conduct effective oversight of the excavation 
activities  adjacent  to  the  gas  service  line  and  to  be  prepared  to  promptly  shut  off  the  flow  of 
natural gas after the service line was damaged. Contributing to the casualties in the accident was 
the  failure  of  the  Bergenfield  Fire  Department  to  evacuate  the  apartment  building  despite  the 
strong evidence of a natural gas leak and the potential for gas to migrate into the building. 

11

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

Recommendations 

As  a  result  of  its  investigation  of  the  Bergenfield,  New  Jersey,  pipeline  accident,  the 
National Transportation Safety Board made the safety recommendations listed below. For more 
information  about  these  recommendations,  see  the  safety  recommendation  letters14  to  the 
recipients. 

To the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration: 

Provide  a  summary  of  the  lessons  learned  from  the  Bergenfield,  New  Jersey, 
accident to recipients of emergency planning and response grants. (P-07-1) 

To the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs:  

Establish a requirement that all career and volunteer firefighters receive recurrent 
training on natural gas safety and incident response. (P-07-2) 

To the Borough of Bergenfield: 

Establish  and  implement  written  operating  procedures  for  responding  to  natural 
gas incidents and emergencies. (P-07-3) 

To the American Tank Service Company: 

Establish  and  implement  written  procedures  for  safe  excavation  near  pipelines, 
and provide initial and recurrent training on these procedures to employees. (P-
07-4) 

To the Public Service Electric and Gas Company:  

Modify  your  excavation  damage  prevention  program  and  emergency  plan  to 
require  site-specific  risk  assessments  of  excavators’  plans,  and  implement 
procedures  to  effectively  manage  the  risk,  such  as  increased  surveillance  of 
excavator actions to protect the pipeline and ensuring that gas shut-off valves are 
tested so that they can be closed promptly if the pipeline is damaged. (P-07-5) 

To the International Association of Fire Chiefs: 

Notify your members of the circumstances surrounding the December 13, 2005, 
accident in Bergenfield, New Jersey, and urge them to establish and implement 
procedures  for  emergency  responders  to  rapidly  assess  situations  involving 
natural  gas  leaks  and  to  determine  whether  prompt  evacuations  are  warranted.  
(P-07-6) 

 
 
 
 
                                                 

14 These letters are available on the National Transportation Safety Board’s web site. 

12

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

BY THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD 

MARK V. ROSENKER 
Chairman 

DEBORAH A. P. HERSMAN 
Member 

ROBERT L. SUMWALT 
Vice Chairman  

KATHRYN O’LEARY HIGGINS 
Member 
 

 

STEVEN R. CHEALANDER 
Member 
 
Adopted: May 1, 2007 
 
 
Kathryn  O’Leary  Higgins,  Member,  filed  the  following  concurring  statement  on  
May 8, 2007. 
 

I concur in the accident brief and safety recommendation letters issued on the natural gas 
service line break and subsequent explosion and fire in Bergenfield, New Jersey, that occurred on 
December 13, 2005. I believe the recommendations that resulted from this investigation will help 
prevent other similar accidents in New Jersey.   

As  I  noted  in  the  board  meeting,  however,  I  believe  we  should  go  further  to  prevent 
similar  accidents  in  other  states  and  communities.  I  believe  we  should  have  issued  a 
recommendation  to  the  Pipeline  and  Hazardous  Materials  Safety Administration  (PHMSA)  to 
share  the  lessons  learned  in  this  investigation  with  the  rest  of  the  country.  Our  investigation 
found serious deficiencies in practices and procedures followed by the excavation contractor, the 
utility company, and the community of Bergenfield. We make recommendations to the State of 
New Jersey concerning recurrent training for firefighters in dealing with gas leaks. We ask the 
contractor to implement written procedures. We make similar and appropriate recommendations 
to  the  Borough  of  Bergenfield,  the  Public  Service  Electric  and  Gas  Company,  and  the 
International Association of Fire Chiefs. 

I am concerned that we could see a similar accident in another community. I believe the 
best way to prevent a similar tragedy is to ask PHMSA, the Federal agency with regulatory and 
enforcement responsibility for pipeline safety, to take a leadership role in helping all states and 
communities understand the mistakes that led to this accident so they can be addressed.  

I am pleased that the Board voted to adopt a recommendation to PHMSA to spread the 
word about this accident to emergency planning and response grant recipients so that training 
funded by these grants will incorporate the lessons learned from the Bergenfield tragedy.  

Member Hersman joined Member Higgins in this statement. 

13

NTSB/PAB-07/01 

