NAL  T

 

O
I
T
A
N

 

S

AFETY

R A SP

N
 

O

L U R IBUS UNUM 

E P

R

T

A

T

I

O
N
 

 B O A R D

 

 

 

National Transportation Safety Board 

Washington, D.C. 20594 

Pipeline Accident Brief 

Accident No.: 
Accident Type: 
Location: 
Date: 
Time: 
Pipeline Operator: 
Fatalities: 
Injuries: 
Property Damage: 
 
 
The Accident 

DCA09FP003 
Release, ignition, and explosion of natural gas 
Rancho Cordova, California 
December 24, 2008 
1:35 p.m. Pacific standard time1 
Pacific Gas and Electric Company 
1 
5 
$267,000 

About 1:35 p.m. on December 24, 2008, an explosion and fire caused by a natural gas 
leak destroyed a house at 10708 Paiute Way in Rancho Cordova, California. One person suffered 
fatal  injuries,  and  five  other  people,  including  one  utility  employee  and  one  firefighter,  were 
hospitalized  as  a  result  of  the  explosion.  Two  adjacent  homes,  one  on  either  side,  had  severe 
damage, and several homes suffered minor damage. According to the Pacific Gas and Electric 
Company (PG&E), the property damage was $267,000. 

On December 24, 2008, at 9:16 a.m., the PG&E Customer Contact Center received a call 
from  a  resident  at  10716  Paiute  Way  reporting  a  gas  odor  outside  her  house.  The  Customer 
Contact Center prepared a case ticket2 and contacted the PG&E Dispatch Office (Dispatch). As 
part  of  normal  procedure,  PG&E  Dispatch  prepared  a  field  order  dispatching  a  gas  service 
representative (technician) to 10716 Paiute Way. 

About  9:21  a.m.  on  December  24,  2008,  PG&E  dispatched  a  technician  to  respond  to 
10716 Paiute Way with a field order to investigate an outside gas leak at a meter. The field order 
had  a  “zero”  priority  rating,  which  called  for  an  immediate  response.  About  9:30  a.m.,  the 
technician  entered  a  code  into  PG&E’s  field  automation  system  using  her  laptop  computer 
confirming that she had received the field order. About 9:55 a.m., she entered another code into 
the system indicating that she was en route to 10716 Paiute Way.  
                                                 

1 All times in this brief are Pacific standard time. 
2 The Customer Contact Center creates a case number for each customer’s call. Then a case ticket, or case ticket 
package,  is  prepared  for  the  case  number  and  entered  into  the  company’s  information  system.  The  case  ticket 
consists  of  the  printed  request  from  the  PG&E  Dispatch  Office,  information  from  the  customer’s  call,  and 
sometimes a map of the pipeline(s) at the location to be investigated. The case ticket is used as a reference for all 
personnel responding, including the technician and maintenance personnel.  

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

The  technician  arrived  outside  10716  Paiute  Way  about  10:15  a.m.  carrying  a 
combustible gas indicator3 across the yard to the door of the house. Before reaching the door, she 
picked up natural gas readings in a water box4 outside the house. Because she had picked up gas 
readings in the yard, rather than at the house meter as directed in the field order, she decided that 
she needed assistance and better detection equipment. The technician met the resident outside the 
single-story5  house.  The  technician  interviewed  the  resident  and  learned  that  she  no  longer 
smelled gas outside her house as she had when she called in the leak earlier that morning. The 
resident  told  the  technician  that  she  did,  however,  smell  gas  outside  her  next-door  neighbor’s 
house at 10712 Paiute Way, and she pointed out the neighbor who was standing at her door.  

 
Figure 1. Diagram showing locations of houses, gas lines, leaks and leak reports, and PG&E 
vehicle. 

                                                 

3  The  combustible  gas  indicator  that  the  technician  carried  was  a  type  that  can  detect  gas  concentrations 

between 0 and 5 percent and that is primarily used to detect gas inside a building. 

4 A water box is put on a water line by the water company, and it allows a junction of water lines, a location for 

a meter, or a way of dispensing water without a hose or a faucet. 

5 All houses on the street were single-story houses on concrete slabs. 

2

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

About 10:24 a.m., the technician spoke to the next-door neighbor, who lived at 10712 
Paiute  Way,  who  told  the  technician  that  she  had  smelled  a  gas  odor  outside  her  house.  The 
technician then asked the resident of 10712 Paiute Way to call PG&E’s Customer Contact Center 
to report a leak in her yard. The Customer Contact Center subsequently received a call from the 
resident of 10712 Paiute Way about 10:29 a.m. reporting a strong gas odor outside her house in 
the garage area. 

At 10:25 a.m., the technician called PG&E’s Customer Contact Center on the dedicated 
telephone  line  that  connects  directly  to  the  Dispatch  Office.  The  technician  requested  that  the 
10716  Paiute  Way  case  be  forwarded  to  the  maintenance  and  construction  department 
(maintenance) so a maintenance crew could be dispatched to the scene to assist with the leak 
investigation.  The  maintenance  crew  would  be  equipped  with  a  flame  ionization  detector 
(ionization detector) that can determine the location of a leak and its migration path,6 whereas 
the technician had a device that could handle only an inside leak. The PG&E Customer Contact 
Center  created  a  case  ticket  for  10716  Paiute  Way  at  10:28  a.m.;  the  maintenance  supervisor 
acknowledged the case ticket about 10:42 a.m. and dispatched a fieldman, a leak investigator, 
and a foreman to the scene.7 

Recognizing  the  immediate  need  for  assistance  from  an  ionization  detector  crew,  and 
because it was Christmas Eve and she was unsure how quickly maintenance could dispatch a 
crew, the technician then called Concord Dispatch8 directly about 10:32 a.m. to request that a 
maintenance crew respond to 10712 and 10716 Paiute Way. About 10:35 a.m., the technician 
made  a  second  phone  call  directly  to  the  PG&E  Customer  Contact  Center  to  request  that  a 
maintenance crew be dispatched to 10712 Paiute Way to assist with the leak investigation. The 
Customer Contact Center created a case ticket for 10712 Paiute Way at 10:42 a.m. 

PG&E requires a field order to be completed before a technician may proceed to the next 
work location. The technician knew that the call from the resident at 10712 Paiute Way would 
lead  to  the  creation  of  a  new  field  order  for  that  address,  so  about  10:38  a.m.  the  technician 
completed the field order for 10716 Paiute Way in the field automation system. She then entered 
a code into the system indicating that she was en route to 10712 Paiute Way.  

The technician immediately proceeded to 10712 Paiute Way, knocked on the door, and 
entered the house at the invitation of the female resident. The technician did not detect any gas 
inside  the  house,  with  the  exception  of  a  small,  “fuzz,”  leak  at  the  water  heater,  which  was 
eliminated by tightening a fitting on the unit. Next, the technician went to the garage where she 
smelled “a little whiff” of natural gas. She then went back into the kitchen to investigate further 
and  met  the  male  resident,  who  indicated  that  the  source  of  the  leak  was  in  his  next-door 
neighbor’s yard.  

                                                 

6  The  ionization  detector  that  the  maintenance  crew  used  was  a  full-range  detector  that  can  detect  gas 

concentrations between 0 and 100 percent and that is used to detect gas outdoors. 

7  The  fieldman,  the  leak  investigator,  and  the  foreman  were  contacted  and  dispatched  to  the  scene  by  the 

maintenance supervisor at 10:41 a.m., 10:42 a.m., and 12:30 p.m., respectively.  

8 Concord Dispatch is for PG&E gas service technicians and is used only by PG&E personnel. The customer 

contact center is for customers and others to report gas leaks or other emergencies.  

3

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

The resident led the technician outside and into the yard of 10708 Paiute Way. Once in 
the yard, the technician detected a natural gas leak at a patch of dead grass in the middle of the 
yard.  The  location  of  the  leak  was  about  5  feet  west  of  the  driveway,  about  45  feet  from  the 
house. The technician checked the gas meter at 10708 Paiute Way for leaks but did not find any.  

After  finding  the  leak  in  the  yard  and  while  returning  to  some  of  the  houses  to  finish 
uncompleted clock tests,9 the technician was evaluating the terrain and her gas readings to try to 
judge the migration path of the natural gas. None of the clock tests on the three houses showed 
excessive flow across the meters. 

The technician knocked on the door of 10708 Paiute Way in an attempt to gain entry and 
determine  whether  any  leaks  existed  inside  the  house,  but  she  received  no  answer.  She  then 
returned to her truck, parked it on the opposite side of the street between 10712 and 10716 Paiute 
Way, facing in the direction of 10708 Paiute Way, and waited beside it. She did not contact the 
fire department to request entry into the house, nor did she place signs on the doors or string up 
tape to warn residents that entry could be hazardous. The technician told investigators that she 
had become increasingly concerned about the leak at the time. As a result, over the next half-
hour  she  made  several  phone  calls  to  the  PG&E  Customer  Contact  Center,  the  maintenance 
department, Concord Dispatch, and the responding leak investigator in an attempt to determine 
whether the maintenance crew was en route and its estimated arrival time. 

About  11:11  a.m.,  the  technician  called  Concord  Dispatch  to  request  a  field  order  for 
10708 Paiute Way. The field order documented the leak in the front yard and that there was no 
excessive flow on the gas meter. About 11:17 a.m., the technician made a third call to the PG&E 
Customer  Contact  Center  to  request  that  the  10708  Paiute  Way  case  be  forwarded  to  the 
maintenance  department  so  a  crew  could  be  dispatched  to  the  scene  to  assist  with  the  leak 
investigation. The Customer Contact Center created a case ticket for 10708 Paiute Way about 
11:22 a.m.; the maintenance department acknowledged it at 11:26 a.m. 

The maintenance department leak investigator arrived at the PG&E service center to pick 
up the ionization detector about 11:30 a.m. but had problems with his truck brakes, which forced 
him to acquire another truck and delayed his departure to Paiute Way. He called the technician 
three times, but he did not notify his supervisor of his delay, nor did he notify Dispatch of his 
delay. The leak investigator left the PG&E service center about 12:42 p.m., more than an hour 
after his arrival there.  

About 11:49 a.m., the technician noted in the field order for 10712 Paiute Way that it 
appeared that the leak was in the vicinity of the patch of dead grass in the front yard of 10708 
Paiute Way. After completing the field order in the field automation system, the technician made 
several calls to co-workers in an effort to determine the status of the responders. One of the gas  
 

                                                 

9  A clock  test  is  used  to  determine  whether  there  is unusual  or  excessive gas  leakage  inside  a house.  A gas 
service technician watches the gas meter to see how much gas is flowing per unit of time (typically, the number of 
cubic feet over 10 minutes).  

4

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

service supervisors she spoke with advised her to stay on scene until she was relieved by the 
maintenance department.  

According  to  the  PG&E  timeline,  the  foreman  arrived  on  scene  about  1:14  p.m.  The 
foreman  parked  his  truck  behind  the  technician’s  truck,  and  they  had  a  brief  discussion.  The 
technician told the foreman that none of the clock tests showed excessive flow across the meter 
and told him the locations where she obtained gas readings and smelled gas. She also told him 
that there was a leak in the yard of 10708 Paiute Way, but that she had been unable to gain entry 
into the house. The foreman relieved the technician, and she left the scene. The leak investigator 
(equipped with the ionization detector) arrived about 5 minutes later, 2 hours 47 minutes since 
the technician had called Concord Dispatch to request the specialized equipment to locate the 
leak.  The  fieldman  arrived  immediately  after  the  leak  investigator;  both  parked  near  the 
foreman’s truck.  

The foreman asked the leak investigator to display the plat10 on his laptop computer. The 
foreman and the fieldman reviewed the plat and then located and marked the service pipelines 
and a portion of the main pipeline with paint and flags. While the foreman and fieldman were 
marking pipelines, the leak investigator prepared the ionization detector at his truck.  

About  1:27  p.m.,  the  leak  investigator  was  attempting  to  locate  the  leak  on  the  main 
pipeline  using  the  ionization  detector  when  a  neighbor  walked  up  to  the  foreman  and  the 
fieldman and told them that a leak in the vicinity had been fixed once before. He was not sure of 
the exact location of the repair, but he said that he remembered that PG&E had dug two holes. 
The foreman then noticed sunken ground at two ends of the yard at 10708 Paiute Way.  

About 1:34 p.m., the leak investigator located the dead grass in the front yard of 10708 
Paiute  Way  and  walked  westward  over  the  main  pipeline  between  the  two  patches  of  sunken 
ground.  The  ionization  detector’s  initial  reading  was  60,000  parts  per  million.  The  reading 
increased to 80,000 parts per million as the leak investigator continued to walk westward. When 
he reached the location of the leak, the device flamed out, meaning the flame of the ionization 
detector went out, and an alarm sounded. The flame-out signaled that the gas-to-air mixture was 
too rich to burn (that is, there was too much natural gas with the volume of air in the intake), 
which is indicative of a leak. The three PG&E employees then agreed that they had identified the 
leak location, and they discussed the likelihood of its being a subsurface leak.  

About  1:35  p.m.,  the  foreman  went  to  his  truck  to  get  a  probe  and  to  prepare  for  use 
another type of gas detector, a combustible gas indicator that helps pinpoint leaks. Meanwhile, 
the leak investigator knocked on the door of 10708 Paiute Way and talked with a resident. When 
they had finished talking, he turned away from the house to begin further investigation, and the 
house  exploded.  (See  figure  2.)  The  homeowner  sustained  fatal  injuries  as  a  result  of  the 
explosion. 

                                                 

10 The plat is a map that shows the locations of the main and service pipelines. 

5

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

 

  Figure 2. Damage caused by explosion. 
Postaccident Investigation 

A  Sacramento  Metropolitan  Fire  Department  investigator  interviewed  the  17-year-old 
granddaughter  of  the  owner  of  10708  Paiute  Way  at  Shriners  Hospital  for  Children  on 
December 29, 2008.  According  to  the  fire  department,  the  granddaughter  stated  that  her 
grandfather had told her of a gas odor in the house before she and her grandfather arrived home 
about  12:00  p.m.  on  December  24,  2008,  and  that  she  had  smelled  a  strong  odor  of  gas  both 
outside and inside the house. She said that the PG&E leak investigator had knocked on the front 
door  and  that  her  grandfather  and  the  leak  investigator  had  gone  outside.  She  went  into  the 
bathroom;  shortly  thereafter  she  heard  a  “whoosh”  and  two  explosions,  and  she  immediately 
escaped to the street. 

On  January  15,  2009,  the  lawyer  for  the  family  at  10708  Paiute  Way  provided 
information  on  behalf  of  the  granddaughter  in  response  to  additional  questions  from  National 
Transportation  Safety  Board  (NTSB)  investigators.  According  to  the  information  from  the 
lawyer, the granddaughter had not smelled gas inside the house at any time. She stated through 
the  lawyer  that  she  had  arrived  at  the  house  shortly  before  noon  and  did  not  see  any  PG&E 
vehicles or personnel, nor did she see any kind of notice on the door prohibiting entrance before 
PG&E could check the premises for gas. She also stated that the PG&E leak investigator had not 
requested entry into the house to check for gas. 

6

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

Emergency Response 

On  December  24,  2008,  about  1:35  p.m.,  two  Rancho  Cordova  police  officers  heard  a 
very  loud  noise  that  sounded  like  an  explosion,  and  they  immediately  notified  their  dispatch 
center,  which  was  the  Sacramento  County  Sheriff’s  Department  Dispatch.  After  hearing  from 
Sheriff’s  Dispatch  that  there  had  been  calls  about  a  possible  explosion  and  learning  of  the 
possible location of the incident, the police officers drove toward the area. While en route, the 
officers heard multiple units of the Sacramento Metropolitan Fire Department dispatched to an 
explosion. First responders arrived on scene about 1:43 p.m. As the fire department worked to 
extinguish the fire, paramedics prepared the injured for transport. There were six injured, all of 
whom were transported to the hospital by 2:00 p.m. PG&E supervisors and the fire department 
verified that there was an active gas leak near the explosion site, and as a result, about 2:04 p.m. 
an evacuation was enforced 10 houses away from the explosion site in both directions. The fire 
department  concluded  the  tactical  response  about  5:03  a.m.  on  December  25,  2008,  when  the 
evacuation was lifted.  
Postaccident Excavation and Field Testing 

Postaccident  excavation  revealed  that  the  source  of  the  natural  gas  leak  was  the  main 
pipeline, where a spool piece11 of pipe had partially pulled out of a 1 1/4-inch coupling. About 
1/4 inch of polyethylene pipe was inside the Metfit12 coupling, although at least 1 inch of pipe is 
held in a correctly assembled coupling. (See figures 3 and 4.) PG&E had installed the spool piece 
of  pipe  and  the  coupling  during  a  September  21,  2006,  repair  of  a  leak  to  the  2-inch  main 
pipeline. The sections of pipe and couplings from the accident were submitted to the NTSB’s 
Materials Laboratory for testing. (See figure 4.) 

                                                 

11 A spool piece of pipe is a short section of pipe used as a replacement pipe in a repair. 
12 Metfit is a  type of pipe coupling owned by US Poly. When the pipeline was installed in 1977, the repair 
process and the Metfit name were owned by DuPont. Since then, the process and Metfit have changed hands several 
times. At the time of the repair (2006), US Poly owned both. 

7

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

Metfit 
coupling 

Spool 
piece

Metfit 
reducing 
coupling 

2-inch main 

Leak 

1 1/4-inch 
inserted pipe 

Assembly 
mark

Fitting from 
squeeze-off 

 
Figure 3. View from above of source of 2008 leak as discovered in the field. Distance 
between leak and assembly mark is 1 inch. 

Metfit 
coupling 

Proper insertion 
depth  

Assembly 
mark

Leak

Metfit 
reducing 
coupling 

Spool piece

Figure 4. Pipeline components excavated from accident site. 

 

8

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

Pipeline Information 

The service pipeline to 10708 Paiute Way was a 1/2-inch DuPont Aldyl A polyethylene 
service pipeline fed by a 2-inch DuPont Aldyl A polyethylene gas main that had been installed in 
1977. The maximum allowable operating pressure for the main and service pipelines was about 
60 pounds per square inch, gauge (psig), and the working, or operational, pressure was about 
55 psig.  

Preaccident Leak/Repair 

On September 15, 2006, about 7:00 a.m., PG&E received a gas odor complaint from the 
owners of 10708 Paiute Way. As a result, PG&E dispatched a crew to the house to evaluate the 
complaint about 4:00 p.m. that day. The crew determined that the source of the odor was a leak 
in the 2-inch Aldyl-A plastic pipe gas main located in front of the house, off the south side of the 
street. 

One PG&E-approved method for making repairs on sections of polyethylene piping relies 
on the Metfit coupling. This coupling is a nylon and steel fitting that produces a gas-tight seal 
when the pipe ends are inserted into the coupling to the proper depth and the stainless steel rings 
are pushed over the fittings using a special installation tool and procedures. If the wall thickness 
or standard dimension ratio13 of the polyethylene pipe is within ASTM D-2513 tolerances, the 
fitting  is  gas  tight,  pullout  proof,  and  reliable.  PG&E  and  US  Poly  procedures  require  the 
installer to check the print line on the pipe and the markings on the fitting to be certain they are 
compatible. PG&E requires a pressure test of the repaired section at 100 psig of air pressure for 
5 minutes and with natural gas at about 50 psig. PG&E also conducts soap tests for leaks on all 
repairs before putting them in service. 

To make the repair at 10708 Paiute Way, PG&E severed the original 2-inch main at two 
locations about 22 feet apart and inserted a section of 1 1/4-inch polyethylene plastic pipe inside 
the  older  2-inch  Aldyl-A  plastic pipe  across  the  leak.  The  repair  pipe  inserted  into  the  2-inch 
main was a 1 1/4-inch iron pipe size14 polyethylene pipe manufactured by US Poly that also had 
a maximum allowable operating pressure of 60 psig and a working pressure of about 55 psig. 
The  inserted  pipe  sections  were  joined  to  the  original  2-inch  main  with  two  US  Poly  Metfit 
1 1/4-inch  by  2-inch  reducing  couplings15  and  one  1 1/4-inch  coupling.  Specifically,  the  main 
was reconnected by installing a 2-inch to 1 1/4-inch Metfit reducing coupling to join one end of 
the severed 2-inch main to one end of the 256-inch-long 1 1/4-inch polyethylene pipe. On the 
other end, to obtain sufficient movement to complete the repair, the long 1 1/4-inch insert pipe 
was then joined by a 1 1/4-inch Metfit straight coupling to an about 6-inch-long piece of 1 1/4-
inch polyethylene pipe. This short pipe section, or spool piece, was joined to the other severed 
end of the 2-inch main by a Metfit 1 1/4-inch to 2-inch reducing coupling. Upon completion of 
the repair, PG&E pressurized the repaired section at 100 psig of air pressure for 5 minutes, and, 

                                                 

13 The standard dimension ratio of pipe is the outside diameter divided by the wall thickness. 
14 All pipe dimensions in this brief are given as iron pipe size measurements unless otherwise noted. 
15 A reducing coupling connects a smaller pipe to a larger one. 

9

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

with natural gas at about 50 psig, PG&E soap tested16 for leaks. The repair was completed on 
September  21,  2006.  PG&E  checked  its  records  of  odor/leak  complaints  and  found  that  no 
reports  of  odor/leaks  in  the  Paiute  Way  neighborhood  were  received  between  September  21, 
2006, and the morning of the accident. 
Postaccident PG&E Investigation 

After  the  December  24,  2008,  accident,  PG&E  and  the  California  Public  Utilities 
Commission  investigated  the  records  of  other  1 1/4-inch  plastic  piping  repairs  to  determine 
whether  Metfit  coupling  leakage  or  pullout  had  been  encountered  elsewhere  in  the  PG&E 
system. It was discovered that one other incident had occurred. 

That incident occurred on October 7, 2006, in Sacramento, California, when an attempt to 
repair a 1 1/4-inch polyethylene pipe used four Metfit couplings, each of which leaked and failed 
when  it  was  tested  during  installation.  PG&E  sent  sections  of  pipe  and  the  four  couplings  to 
US Poly for evaluation because PG&E initially believed that the couplings were the cause of the 
installation failure. US Poly measured three of the fittings and the pipe and concluded that (1) the 
pipe did not meet the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) tolerance for wall 
thickness and (2) the failure apparently occurred when the thin-walled pipe slipped out of the 
Metfit couplings. However, because the pipe was not long enough to contain the entire print line, 
including the manufacturer’s identification, US Poly was not convinced that the pipe tested was 
US Poly pipe. PG&E, which stated that it used only US Poly pipe, checked its truck and yard 
stock for all unused 1 1/4-inch polyethylene pipes with matching print lines. These pipes were 
measured for wall thickness and outside diameter, and all were found to meet ASTM D-2513, 
Standard  Specification 
for  Thermoplastic  Gas  Pressure  Pipe,  Tubing  and  Fittings, 
specifications. PG&E felt that the October 7, 2006, incident was an isolated incident and as a 
result  did  not  follow  up  with  the  manufacturer  beyond  the  original  contact  with  US Poly  or 
perform  further  reviews  within  PG&E.  JM  Eagle,  which  purchased  the  assets  of  US  Poly  in 
2007, conducted a search of its wall thickness monitor records for 2005 through 2007 and found 
no readings below the minimum specified in ASTM D-2513. Furthermore, JM Eagle surveyed 
its 10 largest customers, and none reported any wall thickness problems of any type with their 
specification  pipe.  The  sections  of  pipe  and  couplings  that  PG&E  reported  were  from  the 
October 7, 2006, incident were submitted to the NTSB’s Materials Laboratory for testing.  
Tests and Research 

The polyethylene pipe sections and couplings taken from the accident site were examined 

and measured at the NTSB’s Materials Laboratory. (See table 1.)  

                                                 

form. 

16 In a soap test, a soap solution is applied to a gas pipe that may have a leak. If gas is leaking, soap bubbles will 

10

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

Table 1. Measurements of pipe samples. 

 
 

Source 

 
 

Sample 

  Long 
piece 

 

o
h
c
n
a
R

a
v
o
d
r
o
C

Spool 
piece 

Socket 
fusion 
piece 1 

Socket 
fusion 
piece 2 

A-1 

A-2 

A-3 

A-4 

A-5 

B 

B-3 

 

 

 

n
o
i
t
a

l
l

a
t
s
n

I
 
,

6
0
0
2

 
,

7

 
r
e
b
o
t
c
O

  C 

 
 

E
&
G
P

 

s
d
r
a
Y
e
g
a
r
o
t
S

D 

E 

F 

 

Outer diameter 

(inches) 
1.660 

1.662 

  

1.660 

 

Wall thickness 

(inches) 

0.172–0.176 

0.148–0.152 

0.145–0.153 

1.660 

0.169–0.181 

1.660 

1.650 

1.661 

1.662 

1.655 

1.667 

1.666 

  

1.661 

1.654 

1.659 

1.662 

0.150–0.155 

0.146–0.152 

0.171–0.175 

0.171–0.175 

0.146–0.153 

0.168–0.183 

0.141–0.146 

0.113–0.121 

0.174–0.176 

0.174–0.178 

0.171–0.178 

Meets 

Wall Thickness 
Requirementsa  

 
 

Print line 

Yes 

No 

 

No 

Yes 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

Yes 

No 

 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

 

No 

No 

No 

Yes 

a ASTM D-2513 wall thickness specifications for 1 1/4-inch polyethylene pipe with a standard dimension ratio of 10. 
 

The  Metfit  coupling  was  designed  for  1 1/4-inch  polyethylene  plastic  pipe  with  a 
standard dimension ratio of 10 (SDR 10) and a nominal outside diameter of 1.662 inches and a 
minimum wall thickness of 0.166 inch. Furthermore, the Metfit coupling installation instructions 
state,  “Warning:  before  beginning  installation,  confirm  that  the  pipe  sizes  and  wall  thickness 
(Standard Dimension Ratio) exactly match what is marked on the reducer or bag packaging.”  

The examination of the pipe sections from the accident site revealed that the 20-foot-long 
inserted section of 1 1/4-inch polyethylene pipe  met  the  requirements of ASTM D-2513. This 
section of pipe had an outside diameter of 1.662 inches and a wall thickness range of 0.172 to 

11

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

0.176 inches, and it was marked in accordance with ASTM D-2513. The proper wall thickness of 
ASTM D-2513 1 1/4-inch SDR 10 polyethylene pipe is 0.166 to 0.186 inches.  

The  short,  6-inch  piece  of  1 1/4-inch  spool  pipe  had  no  markings  at  all,  an  outside 
diameter of 1.662 inches, and a wall thickness of 0.148 to 0.152 inches, significantly thinner than 
the minimum wall thickness for ASTM D-2513 SDR 10 pipe. The coupling cannot be tightened 
with  sufficient  sealing  pressure  if  the  wall  thickness  of  the  pipe  does  not  meet  the  minimum 
specifications.  Marks  made  by  the  field  installer  were  found  on  all  of  the  piping  installed  by 
PG&E, and they indicated the proper depth for insertion of the pipe into the coupling.  

Additional  testing  was  conducted  on  pipes  that  PG&E  said  were  part  of  the 
October 7, 2006,  installation  that  had  been  joined  with  Metfit  mechanical  couplings  and  that 
reportedly had experienced a series of leaks and repairs. Pipe sections 1 and 2 were joined by a 
socket  fusion  coupling.  PG&E  also  said  that  all  of  the  sections  of  pipe  involved  in  this 
installation were to be 1 1/4-inch SDR 10 pipe. The pipe sections were labeled by PG&E with a 
letter and/or number combination. The pipe sections retained a number of thick, dark ink marks 
that appeared to be related to installation, as well as a number of marks and labels indicating that 
they had been previously examined, with the marks showing positions where measurements had 
been  taken  and  the  labels  showing  the  results  of  those  measurements.  The  NTSB’s  Materials 
Laboratory  measurements  showed  that  four  of  the  pipe  sections  met  the  ASTM  D-2513 
specification for 1 1/4-inch SDR 10 polyethylene pipe and four had wall thicknesses too thin for 
specification pipe.  

Four additional pipe sections provided to the NTSB had not been placed in service and 
had  been  found  in  PG&E  storage  yards.  Each  of  these  sections  was  labeled  with  a  letter  (C 
through F). The types and sources of those sections were identified as follows: 

C & D  Packing pipe17 from the Pipeline marker bin at the Sacramento service center 

E 

F 

Packing pipe that supported coils of specification pipe at the Fremont materials yard 

Specification pipe with poor-quality print lines from the Fremont materials yard 

There were no print line markings on sections C, D, or E, and these pipe sections either came 
from the pipeline marker bin at PG&E’s Sacramento yard or were recovered sections of packing 
pipe. The wall thickness of section C was too thin to meet the ASTM D-2513 specification, but 
the other segments met the specification according to dimensional measurements made by the 
NTSB’s Materials Laboratory (shown in table 1).  

Four pieces of pipe (both pieces from the Rancho Cordova accident; sample A-2 from the 
October 7, 2006, installation; and piece C from the PG&E yards) were sent to GTI Laboratories 
for further testing of melt flow rate and density. All four specimens were within tolerances for 
specification  pipe.  The  test  results  indicated  that  all  were  correct  gas-grade  polyethylene.  The 
melt flow rate and the density of the spool piece and the packing pipe (C) were identical. 

                                                 

transport. 

17  The  term  packing  pipe  refers  to  unmarked  pipe  lengths  included  in  the  material  used  to  pack  pipe  for 

12

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

PG&E Use of Packing Pipe 

Depending  on  the  quantity  of  polyethylene  pipe  being  packed  for  shipment,  US  Poly 
sometimes  uses  unmarked,  that  is,  nonspecification,  polyethylene  pipe  lengths  as  part  of  the 
packing  material.  The  pipe  used  for  packaging  is  made  from  the  same  resin  and  on  the  same 
equipment as specification pipe products. However, the packing pipe has no print line markings 
and may vary greatly in dimension from specification pipe. This packing pipe is not intended for 
use as a specification pipe product.  

On  February  19,  2009,  PG&E  and  California  Public  Utilities  Commission  party 
representatives  jointly  inspected  the  PG&E  storage  yard  in  Sacramento  as  part  of  the  Rancho 
Cordova  accident  investigation.  They  found  two  pieces  about  6  feet  long  of  1 1/4-inch 
polyethylene pipe that had no print line markings in a bin labeled “Stub Markers18 Only.” PG&E 
sent the pipes to the NTSB’s Materials Laboratory for examination and testing; one of the two 
pipes (C) had a wall thickness thinner than the minimum wall thickness required for ASTM D-
2513 SDR 10 polyethylene pipe, and no print lines or indentations were observed on either C or 
D. 

PG&E  stated  that  it  had  a  sole-source  contract  in  place  with  US  Poly,  and  thus  any 
polyethylene gas piping it received would have been US Poly pipe. Under the contract, the pipe 
was shipped to PG&E’s main warehouse facilities, where it was inspected and then distributed to 
PG&E  facilities  throughout  the  service  territory.  On  February  24,  2009,  PG&E  conducted  a 
search of its warehouse facility in Fremont to further investigate the source of the unmarked pipe 
found  in  Sacramento.  The  party  representative  found  pallets  of  coiled  1 1/4-inch  polyethylene 
pipe  manufactured  by  US  Poly.  The  pallets  contained  four  pieces  of  straight,  unmarked 
polyethylene pipe on the corners of the pallet, apparently used to support the coils. These were 
the only nonspecification pipes found during the inspection of the Fremont warehouse.  

There was no PG&E policy or practice in place at the time of the accident that provided 
direction  on  the  use  of  packing  pipe.  PG&E  determined  that  the  Sacramento  yard  had  an 
informal practice of using packing pipe as stub markers. The packing pipe was stored in separate 
bins  for  stub  markers.  During  PG&E’s  investigation,  two  pieces  of  unmarked  1 1/4-inch 
polyethylene pipe were found in one of these bins. Neither piece had a print line marking. PG&E 
reported that no other PG&E yard used the packing pipe for any purpose. 

Response to Odor and Leak Reports 

The PG&E response to odor complaints and leak reports begins with a caller reporting a 
gas odor inside or outside a house. In response to a phone call reporting a gas odor inside or 
outside a house, the PG&E Customer Contact Center prepares a case ticket and contacts PG&E 
Dispatch.  As  part  of  normal  procedure,  PG&E  Dispatch  prepares  a  field  order  from  the  case 
ticket containing a map and information on the customer’s call and this becomes a reference for 
all  responding  personnel.  Field  orders  are  prioritized:  priority  “zero”  requires  an  immediate 
response.  A  supervisor  stated  that,  in  some  cases,  personnel  drop  whatever  they  are  doing  to 
respond to a field order with this priority. 
                                                 

18 A stub marker is a piece of pipe stuck in the ground to indicate that plastic pipe is buried there. 

13

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

The first responder is a technician who carries a combustible gas indicator with a limited 
range that is designed for indoor leaks. These technicians are not trained to grade outdoor leaks.  

PG&E  technicians  operate  in  accordance  with  California  Public  Utilities  Commission 
Utility Standard S6434 and PG&E Utility Work Procedure WP6434-01, “Gas Leak Test Using a 
Combustible  Gas  Indicator.”  A  technician  who  is  confronted  with  an  outdoor  leak  is  to  call 
Dispatch  and  request  that  a  maintenance  crew  be  sent  to  the  scene.  The  maintenance  crew  is 
equipped  with  an  ionization  detector  that  can  determine  the  exact  leak  location  outdoors.  The 
operator is also trained to determine the gas migration path. 

The  Customer  Contact  Center  creates  a  case  ticket  for  the  house,  and  once  the 
maintenance crew arrives and determines the grade of the leak, the gas distribution supervisor is 
notified and a gas repair crew is sent to make the repairs.  

This accident illuminates shortcomings in PG&E’s response procedures. First, at the time 
of the accident, PG&E did not require any of the responders to periodically check in with their 
dispatch  offices  to  communicate  delays  in  responding.  Second,  PG&E  sent  technicians  (gas 
service representatives) as the first responders to leak complaints. These technicians were neither 
trained  in  grading  outdoor  leaks  nor  equipped  with  the  equipment  required  to  do  so  under 
PG&E’s  operator  qualification  program.  A  technician  who  encountered  an  outdoor  leak  was 
required to call Dispatch and have a leak inspector (equipment operator) sent to grade the leak. 
Third, technicians responding to odor and/or leak complaints did not have barrier tape or notices 
that  could  be  used  to  warn  an  absent  homeowner  that  the  house  was  dangerous  because  of 
leaking gas and not to enter the house. 
California Public Utilities Commission Audit 

The California Public Utilities Commission audited PG&E in early May 2008. The audit 
determined that PG&E was in violation of Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations 192.615 (a)(3) 
and  (a)(4)  regarding  emergency  plans.  It  found  that  the  PG&E  procedure  for  field  service 
representatives responding to gas leaks did not define the term “hazardous leak,” nor did PG&E 
qualify  field  service  representatives  on  the  use  of  gas  detection  equipment  and  grading  leaks 
outdoors.  

On  August  1,  2008,  the  California  Public  Utilities  Commission  sent  a  letter  to  PG&E 
listing the areas of violation found during the May 2008 audit and requesting corrective action. 
In  the  letter,  the  California  Public  Utilities  Commission  ordered  the  company  to  review  its 
procedures  and  make  certain  that  all  personnel  who  respond  to  reports  of  gas  leaks  have  the 
proper training and equipment. The letter also noted the following: 

The  process  in  [Utility  Operations]  Standard  UO-6434,  wherein  events  requiring 
immediate attention are identified and classified by persons not qualified to make such 
decisions,  has  the  real  potential  to  prevent  or  delay  qualified  personnel  from  timely 
responding to, and correcting what can be, very hazardous conditions.19 

                                                 

19 S. K. Shori, California Public Utilities Commission, letter (Notice of Violations of General Order 112E – 

Compliance Inspection of PG&E’s Fresno Division) to G. Carter, PG&E, August 1, 2008. 

14

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

PG&E responded in a November 5, 2008, letter in which PG&E agreed with the findings 

and said it would take certain actions. PG&E agreed to 

•  Update the UO-6434, “Gas Leak and Odor Response,” procedure systemwide,  
•  Define the term “hazardous leak,” and  
•  Properly  train,  qualify,  and  provide  the  proper  equipment  to  the  gas  service 
representatives to grade outdoor leaks. This information was to be communicated to 
PG&E personnel no later than December 31, 2008, in the form of a gas information 
bulletin. 

PG&E Postaccident Actions 

Since  the  December  24,  2008,  accident,  PG&E  reported  to  the  NTSB  that  it  has 
undertaken a number of process improvement initiatives to improve response time and efficiency 
and to preclude the introduction of nonspecification pipe for repairs. The following is a summary 
list of those efforts: 

•  Field  service  representatives  have  been  trained,  qualified,  and  given  the  necessary 
combustible gas detector equipment, in addition to the indoor natural gas detectors 
they  previously  carried,  to  conduct  outdoor  leak  investigations  and  grade  outdoor 
leaks. 
If gas above 1 percent is found indoors, the structure is to be evacuated and Dispatch 
is to be contacted to request 911 assistance. 

• 

•  A  prescriptive  written  evacuation  policy  has  been  established  that  utilizes  the 

expertise of the fire department and first responders. 

•  Field  technicians  carry  warning  tape  that  they  can  use  to  cover  entrances  to  warn 
homeowners  not  to  enter  the  premises  during  leak  investigations  in  the  event  that 
PG&E is unable to gain access during an investigation. 

•  The term “hazardous leak” is now more specifically defined in the PG&E operating 
instructions, and the written instructions include two examples of leaks that qualify as 
hazardous. 

•  Packing pipe is explicitly prohibited from any use and must be discarded. 
•  Written  requirements  have  been  established  to  check  the  wall  thickness,  outside 
diameter, and print line on all plastic pipes before installation to be certain that the 
mechanical fittings are compatible with the pipe. 

•  Heat fusion saddle installation procedures previously used to join service lines to the 
1 1/4-inch  polyethylene  distribution  lines  have  been  replaced  with  an  electrofusion 
process that is a safer and more reliable means of joining the service and distribution 
lines. 

15

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

 

•  Written requirements have been established that all incoming plastic pipe be checked 
for  dimensions  with  the  national  and/or  PG&E  specification  standards  by  PG&E 
quality  assurance  personnel  and  that  nonconforming  materials  be  returned  to  the 
vendor or scrapped. 

Probable Cause 

The  National  Transportation  Safety  Board  determines  that  the  probable  cause  of  the 
December  24,  2008,  release,  ignition,  and  explosion  of  natural  gas  in  Rancho  Cordova, 
California, was the use of a section of unmarked and out-of-specification polyethylene pipe with 
inadequate  wall  thickness  that  allowed  gas  to  leak  from  the  mechanical  coupling  installed  on 
September 21, 2006. Contributing to the accident was the 2-hour 47-minute delay in the arrival 
at  the  job  site  of  a  Pacific  Gas  and  Electric  Company  crew  that  was  properly  trained  and 
equipped  to  identify  and  classify  outdoor  leaks  and  to  begin  response  activities  to  ensure  the 
safety of the residents and public.  

Adopted: May 18, 2010 

 

16

NTSB/PAB-10/01 

