R A SP

N
 

O

L U RIBUS UNUM 

E P

R

T

A

T

I

O
N

 

NAL  T

 

O
I
T
A
N

 

S

AFETY

 

 

 B O A R D

 

National Transportation Safety Board 

Washington, D.C. 20594 
Pipeline Accident Brief 

Accident No.:   
Type of System: 
Type of Accident: 
Location: 
 
Date and Time: 
Owner/Operator: 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
Fatalities: 
Injuries: 
 
Property Damage and Losses:  
 
Material Released: 
 
 
 
Pressure: 
 
 
Type of Failure: 
 
Component Affected:  
 

DCA-03-MP-004 
Natural gas distribution 
Rupture, explosion, and fire 
Wilmington, Delaware 
July 2, 2003, at 1:44 p.m., eastern daylight time 
Delmarva  Power  and  Light  Company  doing 
business as Conectiv Power Delivery 
None 
14 
$300,000 
Natural gas 
6 to 8 inches water column 
Excavation damage 
1-1/4 inch steel service line 

The Accident 

On  July  2,  2003,  a  contractor  hired  by  the  city  of  Wilmington,  Delaware,  to 
replace  sidewalk  and  curbing  dug  into  an  unmarked  natural  gas  service  line  with  a 
backhoe. (See figure 1.) Although the service line did not leak where it was struck, the 
contact resulted in a break in the line inside the basement of 1816 West 3rd Street, where 
gas began to accumulate. A manager for the contractor said that he did not smell gas and 
therefore did not believe there was imminent danger and that he called an employee of 
the gas company and left a voice mail message. At approximately 1:44 p.m., an explosion 
destroyed  two  residences  and  damaged  two  others  to  the  extent  that  they  had  to  be 
demolished.  Other  nearby  residences  sustained  some  damage,  and  the  residents  on  the 
block  were  displaced  from  their  homes  for  about  a  week.  Three  contractor  employees 
sustained serious injuries. Eleven additional people sustained minor injuries. 

Preaccident Events 

Quickform Concrete Company was awarded a contract by the city of Wilmington 
to  replace  sidewalk  and  curbing  at  various  locations  specified  in  the  contract.  Tech 
Consultants was responsible for coordinating the sidewalk and curb improvements with 

 

1 
 

NTSB/PAB-04/01 

 

Quickform for the city. The contract noted that street addresses would be used to indicate 
general work locations but that the exact limits for the work would be marked out on site. 

 

Figure 1. Pulled natural gas service line. 

 

After  the  contract  was  issued,  Tech  Consultants  received  additional  address 
locations for this work. One such location was 1820 West 3rd Street. A Tech Consultants 
project  manager  surveyed  the  work  site  and  determined  that  sidewalk  and  curbing 
replacement  was  needed  in  front  of  the  residences  at  1816,  1818,  and  1820  West  3rd 
Street. On April 10, 2003, a sketch was prepared by Tech Consultants showing the work 
to be done in front of the three addresses. On June 23, 2003, Tech Consultants issued a 
change order to Quickform, which included the 1820 West 3rd Street address location in 
a list of additional address locations. Tech Consultants did not provide the 1816 and 1818 
addresses or sketch to Quickform. According to Tech Consultants, the city asked Tech 
Consultants not to provide these sketches to contractors because the scope of work could 
change and there was an expectation that the contractor would attend the work mark-out 
on site. 

The  contract  also  required  Quickform  to  have  the  underground  utilities  marked 
out before beginning excavation. On June 23, a Quickform manager called Miss Utility to 
have  underground  utilities  marked  for  1820  West  3rd  Street,  but  the  manager 
inadvertently called in an incorrect address: 820 West 3rd Street. 

 

2 
 

NTSB/PAB-04/01 

 

Conectiv Power Delivery provided gas through its pipeline distribution network to 
the residences on this block. On June 24, a Conectiv employee placed yellow paint marks 
on the ground in front of 1818, 1820, and 1822 West 3rd Street to mark the location of its 
underground service lines to those addresses. The Conectiv employee said that although 
the  Miss  Utility  information  noted  planned  excavation  at  820,  he  determined  that  the 
request for 820 was in error, and he proceeded to mark the correct 1820 address and the 
additional addresses of 1818 and 1822 to provide a further safety margin. 

In response to a June 30, 2003, request from the Quickform manager to mark out 
the  project  scope,  on  July  1,  a  Tech  Consultants  inspector  marked  in  white  paint  the 
sidewalk and curbing in front of 1816, 1818, and 1820 to indicate the scope of the work. 
The Tech Consultants inspector said that the project scope is normally marked out just 
days ahead of the work in order to (1) reduce the likelihood that those who live in the 
area will extend the marking in an attempt to get work done in front of their houses, and 
(2) limit the amount of open construction ongoing at any given time. Tech Consultants 
and  Quickform  said  that  about  half  the  time,  a  Quickform  representative  would 
accompany the Tech Consultants inspector when locations were being marked; however, 
on July 1, a Quickform representative did not accompany him. The inspector said that he 
did  not  routinely  look  for  signs  that  the  locations  of  underground  utilities  had  already 
been marked, and he could not recall noticing which addresses had been marked as he 
marked the job out in front of 1816, 1818, and 1820 West 3rd Street. 

On July 2, a Quickform crew arrived at the accident site location. The Quickform 
foreman said that he understood that the white paint marks defined the scope of work and 
that as a result he understood that his crew was to replace sidewalk and curbing in front 
of  1816,  1818,  and  1820.  He  also  said  that  because  he  didn’t  see  any  yellow  paint 
markings in front of 1816, he believed that there was no underground gas line there and 
that it was safe to excavate with a backhoe. 

On July 2, a Quickform backhoe contacted and pulled up an unmarked 1-1/4 inch 
steel service line serving 1816 West 3rd Street. Contractor employees estimated that the 
damage to the service line occurred at about 1:30 p.m. The crew was not aware that the 
action  of  pulling  the  service  line  outside  resulted  in  a  break  to  the  line  inside  the 
basement at 1816 West 3rd Street. Natural gas then began to accumulate in the residence. 
The Quickform crew said when they saw the damage, they stopped excavation activities 
and  notified  the  Quickform  manager  when  he  arrived  on  site  a  few  minutes  after  the 
service line was contacted. 

The line was not leaking outside,1 and the crewmembers and manager said that 
they did not smell a gas odor coming from the pulled line itself; however, four of the five 
crewmembers reported that they smelled a faint gas odor at other points along the block 
before the explosion. The Quickform manager called the Tech Consultants inspector to 
ask for the phone number of a Conectiv engineer to report the damage; cell phone records 
show  that  this  call  was  placed  at  1:31  p.m.  And  according  to  cell  phone  records,  the 
                                                 

1 Postaccident pressure tests established that the service line was not leaking outside. 

 

3 
 

NTSB/PAB-04/01 

 

manager placed a call at 1:34 p.m. to the Conectiv engineer’s phone, and the manager left 
a voice mail message.  

A  resident  of  1816  West  3rd  Street  said  that  she  smelled  a  strong  odor  in  her 
house at about 1:00 p.m. or shortly thereafter. She and her two children left the house, but 
she did not tell anyone about the odor. At 1:44 p.m., the explosion occurred. Eight other 
residents who lived on the block told investigators that they smelled a gas odor before the 
explosion.  Except  for  Quickform’s  voice  mail  to  Conectiv,  no  calls  were  placed  to 
Conectiv or the fire department about the damaged line or a leak before the explosion. 

Emergency Response 

Beginning at 1:45 p.m., the Wilmington Police Department’s dispatcher received 
numerous  telephone  calls  reporting  an  explosion  on  West  3rd  Street.  The  police 
department responded to the site to evacuate residents, conduct crowd and traffic control, 
and provide security. 

At  1:45  p.m.,  the  Wilmington  Fire  Department  initially  dispatched  two  engine 
companies, a ladder company, and a battalion chief. At 1:48 p.m., the first responding 
city  ambulance  arrived  at  the  accident  site.  New  Castle  County  Emergency  Medical 
Services (EMS) received the initial dispatch and was en route to the scene at 1:49 p.m. At 
1:50 p.m., the first fire department units arrived at the site. At 1:53 p.m., the first EMS 
responders  arrived  at  the  site.  At  1:53 p.m.,  the  deputy  chief  of  operations  for  the  fire 
department arrived at the site and assumed incident command. 

Postaccident Excavation Procedures 

In  September  2003,  Tech  Consultants  modified  the  contracts  for  sidewalk  and 
curb  improvements  to  require  the  contractor  to  be  present  for  marking  out  the  project 
scope, and then to call Miss Utility to have the underground utilities marked out for the 
project scope.  

Since  the  accident,  Quickform  has  developed  written  safety  procedures  that 
instruct  employees  to  verify  that  underground  utilities  are  marked  before  beginning 
excavation  and  to  call  emergency  numbers  if  a  natural  gas  line  is  hit.  The  Quickform 
manager  advised  that  the  company’s  interpretation  of  a  hit  line  includes  a  line  that  is 
pulled. 

Occupational Safety and Health Administration 

The U.S. Department of Labor’s Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
(OSHA)  investigated  this  accident.  Title  29  Code  of  Federal  Regulations  (CFR) 

 

4 
 

NTSB/PAB-04/01 

 

1926.651  establishes  excavation  requirements  designed 
to 
underground  utilities,  including  a  requirement  to  establish  the  location  of  underground 
installations  before  opening  an  excavation.  On  December  3,  2003,  OSHA  issued  a 
citation and notification of penalty to Quickform for not contacting Miss Utility before 
excavating in front of 1816 West 3rd Street. 

to  prevent  damage 

As  a  result  of  its  investigation  of  a  natural  gas  pipeline  accident  in  St.  Cloud, 
Minnesota,  on  December  11,  1998,2  the  Safety  Board  made  the  following  safety 
recommendation to OSHA: 

P-00-2 
Require  excavators  to  notify  the  pipeline  operator  immediately  if  their 
work  damages  a  pipeline  and  to  call  911  or  other  local  emergency 
response number immediately if the damage results in a release of natural 
gas or other hazardous substance or potentially endangers life, health, or 
property.  

In  response  to  this  safety  recommendation,  on  June  13,  2003,  OSHA  issued  a 
Safety and Health Information Bulletin that advises contractors on the hazards of striking 
underground gas lines during excavation work. The bulletin recommended informing the 
pipeline  operator  immediately  if  the  excavator  causes  damage  to  a  pipeline  and  to 
immediately contact emergency authorities if the damage results in a release of natural 
gas or other hazardous substances. 

Common Ground Alliance Best Practices 

The Common Ground Alliance provides a guide to underground utility damage 
prevention best practices in use throughout the United States. These best practices speak 
to the value of effective communication among those involved in excavation activities. A 
best practice notes the value of premarking the excavation area before the one-call3 and 
before the locator arrives on site as a means of communicating where the excavation is to 
occur. A best practice advises that upon arrival at the excavation site, excavators should 
verify that the dig site matches the one-call request.  

Another  best  practice,  which  came  about  in  response  to  another  safety 
recommendation issued as a result of the Safety Board’s investigation of the St. Cloud, 
Minnesota,  accident,  states  that  excavators  should  notify  the  pipeline  operator 
immediately if their work damages a pipeline and to call 911 or other local emergency 
                                                 

2 National Transportation Safety Board, Natural Gas Pipeline Rupture and Subsequent Explosion in St. 
Cloud, Minnesota, December 11, 1998. Pipeline Accident Report NTSB/PAR-00/01 (Washington, D.C.: 
NTSB, 2000). 

3 The one-call system, the name of which varies from State to State, allows excavators, with a single 
call,  to  notify  all  underground  facility  owners  who  are  members  of  the  one-call  system  of  planned 
excavation so the locations of the various facilities can be marked.  

 

5 
 

NTSB/PAB-04/01 

 

response number immediately if the damage results in a release of natural gas or other 
hazardous substance or potentially endangers life, health, or property.4  

Public Education 

In  September  2002,  Conectiv  included  a  natural  gas  informational  insert  in  the 
utility bills of its natural gas customers. As part of its public education program, Conectiv 
mailed this type of insert to its natural gas customers approximately once per year. The 
insert included advice to customers that if the odor was extremely strong to evacuate the 
premises and call Conectiv. 

Title  49  CFR  192.616  requires  that  pipeline  operators  establish  a  continuing 
education  program  to  enable  the  public  to  recognize  a  gas  pipeline  emergency  for  the 
purpose of reporting it to the operator or appropriate public officials. 

The  Safety  Board  has  long  been  concerned  about  the  issue  of  pipeline  public 
education  programs,  including  the  content,  distribution,  and  effectiveness  of  pipeline 
operators’ safety materials for both hazardous liquid and natural gas pipelines. As a result 
of  its  investigation  of  a  liquid  butane  pipeline  accident  near  Lively,  Texas,  on 
August 24, 1996,5  the  Safety  Board  recommended  that  the  Research  and  Special 
Programs Administration (RSPA): 

P-98-38 
Revise 49 Code of Federal Regulations Part 195 to require that pipeline 
operators periodically evaluate the effectiveness of their public education 
programs using scientific techniques. 

In December 2003, the American Petroleum Institute published its Recommended 
Practice  (RP)  1162  Public  Awareness  Programs  for  Pipeline  Operators.  This  standard 
calls  for  pipeline  operators  to  periodically  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  their  public 
education programs. RSPA has advised the Safety Board that organizations representing 
essentially  the  entire  gas  and  hazardous  liquid  pipeline  industry  have  urged  RSPA  to 
incorporate RP 1162 into the pipeline safety regulations and that RSPA is committed to 
incorporating by reference RP 1162 into the pipeline safety regulation (49 CFR Parts 192 
and  195).  As  a  result,  the  Safety  Board,  on  November  21,  2003,  classified  Safety 
Recommendation P-98-38 “ClosedAcceptable Action.” 

                                                 

4 Safety Recommendation P-00-1. 
5  National  Transportation  Safety  Board,  Pipeline  Rupture,  Liquid  Butane  Release  and  Fire,  Lively, 

Texas, August 24, 1996. Pipeline Accident Report NTSB/PAR-98/02 (Washington, D.C.: NTSB, 1998). 

 

6 
 

NTSB/PAB-04/01 

 

Probable Cause: 

The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of 
the  July  2,  2003,  natural  gas  explosion  in  Wilmington,  Delaware,  was  the  failure  of 
Quickform to verify that all underground facilities were marked within the proposed dig 
site  before  beginning  excavation.  Contributing  to  the  accident  was  the  failure  of  Tech 
Consultants  and  Quickform  to  effectively  communicate  about  the  project  scope. 
Contributing to the severity of the accident was the failure of Quickform employees to 
immediately notify the utility owner and emergency authorities when they realized they 
had struck and pulled up a gas service line.  

Adopted: April 6, 2004 

 

7 
 

NTSB/PAB-04/01 

